$TITLE:
Debates on Gender and Technology: Cesarean Births in Taiwan

$DEPARTMENT:
Anthropology

$KEYWORDS:
Cesarean sections, Gender politics, Taiwan, Technology, China

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation  analyzes the gender politics of Cesarean births in Taiwan by  investigating and reinterpreting the so-called maternal requests for  Cesarean sections. Since the 1990s, the Taiwanese Cesarean rates have  been reported as among the highest in the world. The government and  public discourse in Taiwan exclusively attributed the high Cesarean  rates to women's demand for this technological intervention in  childbirth. This dissertation reacts to this argument by analyzing how  the entangled political, economic, cultural, and gendered forces at work  produce one of the highest rates of Cesarean births in the world. This  research also illuminates the specific context in which Cesarean births  become a structurally determined "choice." In this context,  obstetricians rely on Cesarean sections to address their stressful work  when women feel compelled to seek this technology in order to avoid risk  based on medical information they are given, and to avoid the often  dehumanizing and painful procedures of vaginal births.Moreover,  through reinterpreting maternal requests for Cesarean sections as  women's strategic responses to the medical system in the Taiwanese  context, this dissertation engages in feminist debates regarding the  relationships between gender and surgical births. I argue that when  confronting technological intervention in childbirth Taiwanese women are  not simply victims, nor self-motivated users of technology, which is in  contrast to a Western feminist focus on empowerment and resistance in  the face of biomedical management of childbirth. By analyzing how women  in Taiwan construct pragmatic responses to institutionally structured  power relations, I show that maternal requests for Cesarean sections are  often at the intersection between women's Surface provides description only. Full text is available to ProQuest subscribers. Ask your Librarian for assistance. control over  childbirth and their agency with the medical system.In  doing so, this ethnographic study counteracts the unjustifiable blame  on women for the high Cesarean rates, and adds new knowledge to feminist  theorization of gender and technology. As shown in the case of maternal  requests for Cesarean sections in Taiwan, the various possibilities of  women's confrontation with technology are already embodied in women's  active and pragmatic responses to technological interventions in  childbirth.