$TITLE:
Artifacts of Exchange: A Multiscalar Approach to Maritime Archaeology at Elmina, Ghana

$DEPARTMENT:
Anthropology

$KEYWORDS:
Elmina, Ghana, Shipwreck, Underwater Archaeology

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation focuses on the excavation and interpretation of  two European ships discovered at Elmina Ghana, the coastal site of the first and  largest European fort in sub-Saharan Africa. Discovered in 2003, the first  vessel, located 1.5 miles offshore of the castle, is largely comprised of  remnants of cargo exposed on the seafloor. European trade wares recovered from  the site suggest a mid-seventeenth century vessel, most likely of Dutch origin.  AMS radiocarbon dates obtained from several fragments of wood recovered in cores  taken at the site support this assumption. The second vessel was discovered by  accident during the 2007 dredging of the Benya River, a small lagoonal system  that empties into the sea at Elmina. Largely destroyed during the operation,  identifiable remains included fifteen timbers and three cannon. Dendrochronology  and ship construction techniques indicate the remains to be those of an early  eighteenth century Dutch vessel. The two ships thus represent different time  periods, historical settings, and archaeological contexts. Yet, the value of  both to the reconstruction of the West African past lies with both their local  and global contexts. On one hand, they represent unique insight into the  construction of the European ships that traded on the coast and their cargoes.  On the other, data on their cargoes and associated artifacts provide information  on trade and exchange in a world area that has received little attention from  underwater archaeologists.Often times the work of underwater archeologists has been  criticized for producing particularistic interpretations lacking wider context  and theoretical synthesis. Shipwrecks were investigated for their intrinsic  value, an emphasis was given to spectacular objects, and the literature  resulting from these excavations was primarily descriptive in nature. In my  dissertation I argue that such deficiencies can be countered by incorporating a  theoretical framework which engages both the nomothetic and particularistic. To  a large extent, the questions that confront studies of shipwrecks are problems  of scale: how do we move from the minutia of cargoes and the specificity of an  event to wider social processes? Methodologically, how do we decide what data  are to be collected and evaluated? Conceptually, what is it that we seek to  understand from our studies? Grappling with these questions I draw upon the  methodological and conceptual insights afforded by microhistory, the Annales  school, and Braudel's three scales of history. I propose a dialectical  interpretation of shipwrecks attentive to the intersection of local patterns and  global forces in the shaping of history. Utilizing macro-scale historical  generalizations (i.e. trade patterns, cargoes, ship, and artifact  characteristics) archaeologists can interpret, and identify the micro-scale  event (nationality, date, vessel name, wrecking event). Once done, the  particulars of the site in turn afford means of understanding large-scale social  processes.