$TITLE:
Issues on Clean Diesel Combustion Technology Using Supercritical Fluids: Thermophysical Properties and Thermal Stability of Diesel Fuel

$DEPARTMENT:
Biomedical and Chemical Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Clean fuel technology, Diesel fuel surrogates, Supercritical fluids, Thermalphysical properties, Thermal stability

$ABSTRACT:
The clean diesel combustion technology using supercritical fluids  is aimed to both improve fuel economy and reduce harmful emissions. This novel  process involves preparation, injection and combustion of supercritical  fuel/diluents mixtures. Design and development of this new process require a  deep understanding of fuel properties. The current study has attempted to  address three fuel property related issues: fuel surrogates, diffusivity and  thermal stability.Fuel surrogates are often used in engine research to mimic real  fuel properties. In this work, ten diesel fuel surrogates were investigated, and  the ability of these surrogates to predict diesel fuel properties was evaluated.  It was found that none of them were able to predict all properties of interest  including volatility, critical points, density, viscosity, heat capacity, and  thermal conductivity. Different surrogates are suggested for predictions of  different properties.Diffusion coefficients of diesel fuel and surrogate compounds in  SCCO2 were determined using the Taylor dispersion method  at temperatures and pressures up to 373.15 K and 30 MPa, respectively. Results  were correlated by Wilke-Chang, Scheibel, He-Yu, and correlations. It was found  that the He-Yu correlation had the best prediction capability, while the  correlation gave overall best fit for experimental data with AAD% < 8%.  Experimental uncertainties caused by sample injection, detector linearity,  mobile phase mean velocity, and column orientation were extensively discussed. A  dimensionless parameter φ was proposed to characterize the effect of  the injection volume, and a new D12-U pattern diagram was  generalized based on current results to describe the impact of mobile phase mean  velocity on diffusivity measurements.The effects of temperature, residence time and  CO2 on thermal stability of diesel fuel at high  temperatures were investigated by both batch and continuous thermal stressing  experiments. Results showed that thermal stability of diesel fuel decreased as  temperature and residence time increased. 400-420 °C was found to be the  optimal temperature range where supercritical fuel delivery and combustion could  work. The presence of 10 wt% CO2 reduced accumulation of  solid deposits due to enhanced solvent capacity. However,  CO2 was not likely to have the ability to chemically  prevent fuel coking. Solid deposits of different sizes, morphologies and  structures were observed at 300 - 440 °C, which implies different  deposit formation mechanisms.