$TITLE:
Characterization of the glial scar using Raman spectroscopy, microindentation, and immunohistochemistry

$DEPARTMENT:
Biomedical and Chemical Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Glial scar, Spinal cord injury, Microindentation

$ABSTRACT:
At the site of injury in the spinal cord (SC), a glial scar (GS) forms.  This scar has been classically hypothesized to be a physical and  chemical barrier to nerve regeneration. Current research on spinal cord  injury (SCI) focuses on treating the GS as a chemical barrier due to the  remodeled extracellular matrix in the GS. The objective of this  research was to elucidate structure-property relationships in injured  SC. Thus, this study investigated the biochemical and physical  properties of the injured SC,  in its native physiological state  , using two unique approaches: Raman spectroscopy (RS) and  microindentation based stress relaxation, for biochemical and  viscoelastic characterization, respectively. Lateral hemisection injury  and a moderate contusion injury models were characterized using RS. For  stress relaxation experiments, SCI was investigated using the lateral  hemisection model. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to  corroborate Raman spectra and understand the physical structure of the  injured cord. Adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were sacrificed 4 days, 2  weeks, and 8 weeks post-injury (PI) for the hemisected groups and at 2  weeks PI for the contused groups. Animals were perfused with isotonic  saline and extracted cords were used without further preparation.  Relaxation behavior of SCs was modeled using a unique empirical model  based on a spring-dashpot system and a stretched exponential. Results  from the RS showed that injured SCs could easily be distinguished from  uninjured controls, and the changes were systematic. Specifically,  spectral differences were observed in peaks corresponding to the  aggregation and hydrolysis of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans, and  demyelination. Microindentation showed that the stiffness of cords  decreased, and that the viscous behavior was more pronounced PI. The  injured cords two weeks PI displayed significantly different  viscoelastic behavior, by virtue of having the largest time constant and  viscosity, as ascertained from the model parameters. These results  correlated with peak proteoglycan expression, and complete demyelination  at two weeks PI. As a pioneering study, this work lays the foundation  for the development of RS as an  in vivo  probe, in SCI  research. In summary, this study demonstrated that RS can be employed to  distinguish uninjured SCs from injured SCs, and that the GS is not  simply a stiffness barrier but rather, it displays complex viscoelastic  behavior likely indicating changes in tissue permeability and  diffusivity.