$TITLE:
Evolution of Complex Sperm Morphology

$DEPARTMENT:
Biology

$KEYWORDS:
cryptic female choice, post-copulatory sexual selection, sperm competition, sperm conjugation, sperm heteromorphism, sperm morphological evolution

$ABSTRACT:
Sperm form evolves rapidly and dramatically, particularly in taxa  with internal fertilization. Post-copulatory sexual selection at the level of  individual sperm has been suggested to explain the evolution of two enigmatic  sperm phenotypes: sperm heteromorphism, where more than one type of sperm is  produced by a male, and sperm conjugation, where multiple sperm join together  for motility and transport through the female reproductive tract before  dissociation prior to fertilization. I explore the taxonomic distribution of  sperm heteromorphism and conjugation, speculate on the potential developmental  origins and discuss functional hypotheses for evolutionary maintenance of these  remarkable traits. I subsequently focus on the patterns of sperm morphological  evolution in diving beetles (Dytiscidae), an excellent model to examine the  evolution of sperm heteromorphism and conjugation. I use phylogenetically  controlled regression and Bayesian estimation to infer ancestral sperm traits,  identify both the rate and directionality of probable evolutionary transitions  and test if the evolution of female reproductive tract design might have driven  the evolution of complex, multivariate sperm form. I found sperm conjugation to  be the ancestral condition in diving beetles, with subsequent diversification  into three qualitatively unique forms (i.e., aggregates, pairs and rouleaux),  each exhibiting varying degrees of evolutionary loss and convergence. Evolution  of sperm head shape was correlated with conjugation, consistent with statistical  support for non-random patterns of evolutionary transitions betIen the different  forms of conjugation. The results suggest that both sperm length and sperm  heteromorphism have independent evolutionary trajectories from conjugation.  Results of Bayesian analyses suggest that the evolution of sperm morphology  tracks changes in female reproductive structures. Data from both behavioral  studies and transmission electron microscopic images of sperm conjugates stored  in the female tract support the interpretation that sperm conjugation is an  adaptation for maintaining favored positions for fertilization in the female  reproductive tract. The results show that although sperm often have complex and  varied sperm morphology, diversification of sperm form might also be constrained  along particular evolutionary pathways. Moreover, the results highlight the  importance of sperm-female interactions as an agent of diversification.