$TITLE:
The Consequence of Anthropogenic Disturbance on Communication and the Operation of Sexual Selection in the Eastern Bluebird (Sialia Sialis)

$DEPARTMENT:
Biology

$KEYWORDS:
anthropogenic disturbance, communication, Eastern bluebird, urban noise

$ABSTRACT:
Signals that are efficiently transmitted and easily detected in  their signaling environment are favored by natural selection. Anthropogenic  disturbance can rapidly alter the signaling environment, and recent studies have  shown that acoustic and visual signals change in response to these altered  habitats. Although these studies provide important insight into the effects of  urbanization on animal signals and have served as experiments testing the role  of the environment in shaping signal design, several key aspects of how signal  design can be influenced by environmental changes remain unclear.Previous studies have focused on signals used between adults,  such as those used in mate choice, yet other signals should be similarly  affected by anthropogenic disturbance. Thus, one facet of my research examines  how anthropogenic disturbance can influence parent-offspring communication. I  tested whether nestling mouth coloration in Eastern bluebirds  (Sialia sialis) was a signal of quality, and if a  parents ability to discriminate among the mouth coloration of their nestlings  was affected by level of human disturbance. I found that the perceived color  contrast of nestling mouths against its nest was significantly correlated with  nestling body condition, suggesting that it may be signal of nestling quality.  Additionally, I found that the parent's ability to perceived a difference in  color contrast of a nestling's mouth among nest-mates was lower in disturbed  habitats, than in undisturbed habitats, showing less discriminability among  nestlings in disturbed habitats. These results suggest that parent-offspring  communication can be affected by anthropogenic disturbance which may reduce a  parent's ability to preferentially invest in high quality young.Past research on anthropogenic disturbance and signaling has  focused on the response of single signals, yet most organisms communicate using  signals from multiple sensory systems (i.e., multimodal signals). Thus, I  examined how anthropogenic disturbance can simultaneously influence components  of multimodal signals in Eastern bluebirds. I measured the visual and acoustic  environment at different disturbance levels and related them to male plumage and  song characteristics. I found that in areas with high levels of anthropogenic  noise, males sing at a higher minimum frequency, presumably to avoid overlap  with low frequency background noise. I also found that the visual background is  altered in disturbed sites; however, plumage characteristics did not covary with  the altered habitats. These results suggest that human disturbance is  interfering with both visual and acoustic signals, yet only acoustic signals  have responded to the changes.Few studies on anthropogenic disturbance directly explore the  explicit evolutionary mechanisms underlying the changes in signal design. Thus,  in the final chapter of my dissertation, I explored how selection on traits  varied across habitats with different levels of disturbance. To do this, I  determined paternity of nestlings using microsatellite. Then, I determined the  major factors influencing rates of extra-pair paternity (i.e., proportion of  nestlings within a nest that were sired by other males), and tested whether  these factors varied with disturbance levels. I found that the minimum frequency  of song, and the brightness of the male's chestnut breast are important  predictors of extra-pair paternity rate across all disturbance levels.  Additionally, I found an interaction between disturbance level and the minimum  frequency of song in relation to extra-pair paternity. This interaction effect  was due to differences in selection pressure on the minimum frequency of song in  relation to habitat disturbance. Males that sing in higher minimum frequencies  have lower rates of extra-pair paternity, in disturbed areas, but higher rates  of extra-pair paternity in undisturbed areas. These results suggest that  selection on signals vary across disturbance levels and this could drive the  observed changes in the design of signals. Potential consequences of these  changes include the possibility of long-term differentiation between bluebird  populations living in disturbed and undisturbed habitats, and a shift in  important traits across the entire species.