$TITLE:
The Maintenance of Male Color Polymorphism in Poecilia parae

$DEPARTMENT:
Biology

$KEYWORDS:
Competition, Female mating preferences, Genetic color polymorphism, Poeciliidae, Sexual selection, Visual environment

$ABSTRACT:
Genetic color polymorphisms are common in nature, and a major  challenge for evolutionary biologists has been to understand how they are  maintained despite the effects of directional selection. Recent studies suggest  that frequency-dependent selection may explain the persistence of intraspecific  variation in color. However, it remains to be determined whether  frequency-dependent selection is the most predominant (or perhaps the only)  mechanism to maintain such genetically-based polymorphisms.    Using a South American fish, Poecilia  parae, my dissertation aims to elucidate the relative roles of  natural and sexual selection in the maintenance of polymorphisms in natural  populations. Poecilia parae males exhibit five  distinct, Y-linked and co-occurring color morphs: (i) `immaculata', the smallest  and drab-colored males that resemble juvenile females; (ii) `parae', the largest  males that exhibit a striped tail and black vertical body bars that intensify  during social interactions; and (iii) the blue, red, and yellow morphs that are  of intermediate body size and display colorful body flanks. Field surveys  indicate that the frequency of each morph remains relatively stable and  consistent over multiple years.    Using a combination of observational and experimental studies,  accompanied by techniques that aimed to characterize the visual ecology (e.g.,  water light transmission, visual sensitivity) of Poecilia  parae, I found that this striking color polymorphism is  maintained by a complex balance between different components of natural and  sexual selection. First, males of the five color morphs employ different  behavioral mating strategies (hereafter alternative mating strategies, AMSs) to  maximize their reproductive success. These AMSs are also accompanied by  differences in morphological traits, such as testes investment and sperm  morphometry that complement the specific tactic. For instance, immaculata males  are often categorized as an `unattractive' male by females, which is correlated  to its phenotypical appearance (smaller and drab). However, this morph is  relatively abundant. I found that immaculata males specialize in `sneak'  copulations and have adaptations (i.e., larger testes and unique sperm  morphology) that possibly confer a fertilization advantage during postcopulatory  events, when competing with the sperm of more attractive males.    My studies also indicate that females have strong mating preferences  for red and yellow males, with visual predators also favoring those males as  prey. These findings suggest that the antagonistic interaction between  pre-mating sexual selection favoring and predation acting against the red and  yellow morphs may prevent them from eliminating other color morphs from the  population. In fact, the red and yellow males were consistently found to be the  rarest morphs across populations. Further, despite overall preference for red or  yellow males, my analysis also detected female preferences for blue males. These  results suggest that the interaction between female mating preferences and  predation accompanied by variation in male reproductive strategies may allow for  the maintenance of complex color polymorphism in natural  populations.   Males of the different morphs further vary in their levels of  aggressive behaviors. In a series of controlled lab experiments, I found that  parae males gain successful matings by preventing other males from accessing  females and/or modifying female mating preferences after test females witness  successful agonistic interactions.      Finally, I found that the signaling environment of  Poecilia parae in nature is variable and that this  contributes to temporal and spatial variation in how males are perceived by  females. Although red males were typically the most conspicuous morph, blue  males were sometimes more conspicuous than red males at several sampling sites.  The results also revealed that an aquatic model predator is able to discriminate  the same male color morphs that resulted also conspicuous for females. However,  it is possible that males and females of Poecilia  parae are using parts of the background spectral that are least  sensitive for predators.    In conclusion, my dissertation suggests that balancing selection  defined by the interaction between various episodes of selection allows for the  invasion of AMSs and thus the maintenance of the male color polymorphism in Poecilia parae.