$TITLE:
Essays on Product Acquisition for Value Recovery

$DEPARTMENT:
Business Administration

$KEYWORDS:
Closed-loop Supply Chain, Component Phase Out, Product Recovery, Remanufacturing, Supply Chain Management, Trade-in incentives

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation studies decision problems facing the  manufacturer that offers cash incentive to encourage a fraction of its install  base to return end-of-use devices. Marketing managers often use such tactics as  a promotion tool to motivate sales of new products. Supply chain managers often  use such tactics to obtain used products for profitable recovery  operations.            The first essay, "Product Acquisition for Remanufacturing: A Dynamic  Analysis," analyzes the performance of buyback and trade-in policies for  acquiring products to be remanufactured. A key distinguishing feature of this  analysis is the consideration of time dynamics. In particular, both the  quantity-condition profile of used products and the market interest in  remanufactured products evolve over time, and the manner of evolution is  influenced by new product sales. Essay 1 introduces and analyzes a series of  models that reflect the dynamics of customer willingness-to-return and  willingness-to-pay attitudes, the size and condition of the OEM product install  base, the demand for remanufactured product, and the demand for new product.  Conventional approaches set trade-in and buyback prices to maximize profits in a  single period; however, our analysis show that companies can earn higher profits  by adopting a proactive approach.           The second essay "Final Purchase and End-of-Use Acquisition Decisions  in Response to a Component Phase-Out Announcement" is motivated by informal  talks with supply chain executives from the computer industry. Essay 2  investigates a problem faced by a durable-goods manufacturer of a product that  is no longer manufactured but still under warranty. A supplier announces that a  component of the product will be phased out and specifies a deadline for the  final order. In addition to determining the final order quantity from the  supplier, the manufacturer may introduce a trade-in program to generate an  alternative supply of the component for the purpose of satisfying warranty  claims. We analyze how industry and market characteristics influence the  manufactures optimal decisions and profits. The analysis in the second essay  lends insight into the determinants of the initial order quantity, the  characteristics of a well-designed trade-in program to support component  harvesting, and the cost of ignoring a trade-in program for component  harvesting. We find that launching a trade-in program and harvesting spare-parts  from the returned device is not only a viable response to a supplier's component  phase out announcement, under certain conditions, launching a trade-in program  is actually profitable.