$TITLE:
Buy the Book: Social Reproduction and the Middle-Class Family Outing to the Big-Box Bookstore

$DEPARTMENT:
Cultural Foundations of Education

$KEYWORDS:
Bourdieu, Consumption, Family Outing, Informal Education, Literacy, Social Reproduction

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation is a qualitative ethnography of a big-box  bookstore that considers the relationship between book consumption, status, and  social reproduction. The study draws from five years of fieldwork starting with  three years of participant observation at 45 sessions of the weekly Story Time,  where I observed 297 mothers or caregivers and 411 children. In the first three  years of this research I also conducted informal interviews with 48 families at  the store. Also in this phase of the study I conducted in-depth interviews at  the store with nine bookstore workers and three managers. In the last two years  of the study, drawing from data collected from participant observation and  informal interviews, I conducted in-depth interviews and follow-up interviews  with six families.The project analyzes what informants see as the bookstore's role  as an educative site, a site of consumption, and a site of leisure work. The  term "leisure work" reflects how middle-class parents structure family time at  the bookstore for the purpose of pleasure associated with pursuing both  collective and individualized and interests, and for the education of their  children. The big-box bookstore is an informal educative site, where children  learn literacies associated with reading, spending money, and socializing.  Pierre Bourdieu's concepts of habitus and field; social, cultural, and economic  capital; and social reproduction provide a theoretical framework for  interpreting these perspectives to see how ideas around books come from both  subjective and objective influences that are naturalized in ways that reproduce  middle-class culture.The dissertation considers how workers, parents, and children's  relationships with books inform the habitus, how informants see books as signs  of distinction, and how literacy and books become forms of cultural capital.  These relationships affect the processes of identity formation and social  reproduction. This project argues that, for workers and middle-class families,  book consumption at the big-box bookstore is informed by middle-class desire as  interpreted through a systemic corporate structure and fueled by dispositions  around middle-class acts of consumption. Workers perform low-status, low-wage  jobs that they enjoy for the most part. They struggle for middle-class status  when their work is disrespected or they cannot exercise their expertise due to  the store's corporate structure. At the same time they sometimes misrecognize  their roles because of the status they associate with book work. These  dispositions and experiences reproduce middle-class orientations, as they  influence meaning around cultural capital and books, and as they reflect and  inform what represents status for workers, parents, and children in this study.