$TITLE:
E Effects of Internet Use on Academic Achievement and Behavioral Adjustment among South Korean Adolescents: Mediating and Moderating Roles of Parental Factors

$DEPARTMENT:
Child and Family Studies

$KEYWORDS:
Adolescent development, Family relations, Internet use

$ABSTRACT:
The purpose of this study was to investigate the  interrelationships among adolescent Internet use, parent-adolescent  relationships, and academic/ behavioral adjustment in South Korean families.  Despite the significant numbers of Korean adolescents who use the Internet  (98.7% of Korean children between the ages of 6 and 19 years use the Internet)  for education, social, and recreational purposes, little is known about how  adolescent Internet use impacts family interactions and youth outcomes. Most  research studies on this subject have been descriptive and have provided  inconsistent findings. To examine the impact of adolescent Internet use on youth  outcomes in Korea, six hundred and nine adolescents (10th and 11th graders) and  their parents were recruited from five high schools in Seoul, Korea. Compared to  the general population in Korea, parents in this study were more educated and  from higher socio-economic status backgrounds. Findings indicated that Korean  boys and girls differed in the ways that they used the Internet. Girls were more  likely to use the Internet to watch online education classes and blog more  frequently and longer than boys, whereas boys were more likely to use the  Internet for playing Internet games than girls. Results indicated that Internet  use for educational purposes was associated with adolescent academic  achievement. Social and recreational-Internet use of the Internet was associated  with lower academic achievement. The pathways did not vary for boys and girls.  Parent-child relationships (closeness and conflict) were found to be vital to  youth adjustment and played a significant role in the association between  adolescent Internet use and academic and behavioral outcomes. Future research  studies should investigate how Koreans cope with the influx of this rapidly  developing technology and its impact of family relationships. Additionally,  parenting programs should incorporate strategies about how the Internet can be  used as an educational tool to benefit adolescents.