$TITLE:
Reading beliefs and strategies of Taiwanese mothers with preschoolers in relation to the children's emergent literacy

$DEPARTMENT:
Child and Family Studies

$KEYWORDS:
China, Interactive strategies, Cross-cultural, Story books, Reading beliefs, Taiwanese

$ABSTRACT:
The primary goals of this study were to explore (a) Taiwanese mothers' beliefs about early storybook reading, (b) their interactive strategies during storybook reading, and (c) whether the link of maternal reading beliefs and child emergent literacy outcome was mediated through home language environment and maternal interactive strategies. Taiwanese preschoolers' emergent reading behaviors were examined. In the study, eighty-two pairs of mothers and preschool children (3-and-4-years-old) participated in the full research protocol. The procedures included parental reading beliefs, videotaping of mother-child reading interaction, a child picture book reading episode, and receptive (PPVT) and expressive (ITPA subtest) psychometric child language assessments. Factor analysis revealed two dimensions of reading beliefs for the 82 Taiwanese mothers: Teaching Strategies and Positive Emotional Affect. Maternal beliefs about positive emotional affect were a strong predictor of child emergent literacy outcomes than beliefs about teaching strategies. Taiwanese mothers used the following interactive strategies most frequently: "pointing" (68%), "asking convergent questions" (46%), "labeling and describing" (33%), and "asking divergent questions"(33%). Taiwanese preschool children's most frequently demonstrated behaviors during the 4-minute child book reading episode were: "labeling and describing the pictures" (43%), and "refusing to read or browsing pages without verbalizing" (32%). Home language environment and observed maternal reading behaviors with their preschoolers were not significant mediators on the relationship between maternal beliefs and child outcomes. Nevertheless, significant associations were both found between maternal beliefs and parental practice variables and between maternal practice variables and child outcome variables.