$TITLE:
Citrate Binding to the Membrane Protein Proteorhodopsin

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:
Anions, Citrate, Intracellular loop 1, Precipitation, Proteorhodopsin, Purification

$ABSTRACT:
Proteorhodopsin (pR) is an intrinsic membrane protein with an   important role in solar-energy storage of the biosphere. Earlier work in  our lab  has shown that polyhistidine-tagged pR can be purified by  means of selective  precipitation with citrate under specific  conditions, as can a number of mutants  based on this His6-tagged  pR. Purification of a  heterologously-expressed trans-membrane protein  by a simple salt such as citrate  is novel. However, such a phenomenon  leads to several questions: How does  citrate cause pR precipitation?  Does the polyhistidine-tag assist in such a  precipitation? Is this  precipitation pH-specific? Does citrate affect the  function of pR? Does  citrate-induced pR precipitation have any biological  significance? Are  there other ions that could cause pR precipitation?This  dissertation focuses on understanding the nature of the  interaction of  pR with citrate and other anions, and in particular on trying to  take  advantage of this interaction in order to develop a novel membrane  protein  purification method. The end goal that branches out of these  two aims is to  utilize the compact citrate interaction site identified  in pR, by incorporating  it into other membrane proteins and using it to  permit their purification by  similar simple procedures.In  Chapter 1, I briefly provide some background information on  the wide  variety of structurally-similar proteins as rhodopsins that include pR.   I also describe the general importance of developing purification  methods for  7-helix membrane proteins, including pR.Chapter  2 focuses on the investigation of the nature of  citrate-binding site  of pR. To address the main question of how citrate aids in  pR  purification, site-directed mutagenesis technique was applied to  generate  several single, double, triple or quadruple mutants of pR in a  histidine-tag  free background, which were then tested for their  reactivity to citrate. Several  different anions were tested to examine  if precipitation of pR was specific to  citrate or whether the  precipitation is susceptible to other negatively charged  salts.  Photocycle of pR progresses through several intermediates, each with a   distinct absorption maximum (described in subsection 1.3.1).  M-intermediate is  detected at pH ≥ 8 with λmax =  410  nm. Flash spectroscopy involves excitation of pR at a particular  wavelength that  leads to transient absorption, thus, signaling the  formation of the  corresponding intermediate. Flash-induced transient  visible absorption  measurements were used to assay the effect of  exposing pR to citrate on its  physiological function.Chapter  3 describes the development of a method of purification  of pR using  simple salts, citrate and phosphate. Chapter 4 begins an exploration  of  a future direction. The ultimate objective is to apply the above  techniques  for the general purpose of 7-helix membrane protein  purification, especially for  the important class of pharmacological  receptors known as GPCRs. An attempt at  heterologous expression in E. coli,  and purification, of a mammalian GPCR, is  described therein. Such a  method would be desirable for obtaining proteins for  structural,  functional and pharmacological studies.