$TITLE:
Controlling Biofouling by Surface Engineering and Molecular Inhibition

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:
Anti-biofouling chemistry, Surface engineering, Molecular inhibition, Protein adsorption, Mammalian cell adhesion, Biofilm formation

$ABSTRACT:
The common theme that binds together all the chapters in this  dissertation is anti-biofouling chemistry. By  utilizing tools of surface engineering and molecular inhibition, a hypothesis  driven, systematic approach of controlling the different forms of biofoulings  such as protein adsorption, mammalian cell adhesion and biofilm formation is  presented. Chapter 1 provides a brief introduction about topics relevant for  understanding the studies presented in subsequent chapters. Chapter 2 reports  the synthesis of enantiomerically pure alkanethiols that terminate with  different stereoisomer's of sugar alcohols, and the effect of chirality of these  polyol-terminated self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on resisting protein  adsorption.Chapter 3 and 4 presents the results on confining adhered mammalian  cell (Swiss 3T3 albino fibroblasts) and bacterial (Escherichia  coli) biofilm respectively, within micrometer sized cell adhesive  patterns of methyl-terminated SAMs, surrounded by bioinert chiral  polyol-terminated SAMs. Interestingly, SAMs presenting racemic mixture of  enantiomeric alkanethiols were found to confine the adhered mammalian cells or  biofilm within the micrometer-sized patterns longer than the SAMs presenting  either enantiomer.         Chapter 5 presents the synthesis of chiral polyol-terminated  alkanephosphonic acids to form SAMs on surface of native metal oxides,  particularly TiO2 and  Fe3O4, for evaluating the ability  of these alkanephosphonate SAMs on TiO2 to resist the adhesion of mammalian  cells (Swiss 3T3 albino fibroblasts) and on Fe3O4 to solubilize Fe3O4 (magnetite) nanoparticles in  aqueous media.         Another approach of controlling biofouling due to biofilm formation is  to develop inhibitors for a class of organic molecules called autoinducers  secreted by bacteria, which are responsible for regulating bacterial group  behavior such as biofilm formation. Chapter 6 reports the synthesis of  derivatives of a class of molecules called brominated furanones, which are known  to inhibit biofilm formation in E. coli. Chapter 7  reports the synthesis of novel squarate based molecules named squarylated  homoserine lactones (SHLs), which are structural mimics of the bacterial  autoinducer molecules called acylated homoserine lactones (AHLs). The  synthesized brominated furanone derivatives and SHLs were found to be non-toxic  to E. coli and were able to inhibit the biofilm  formation by the bacterium.