$TITLE:
Application of high throughput sequencing in selection of RNA aptamers

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:
RNA aptamers, Oligonucleotide, Selection cycles, High throughput sequencing, FIXa

$ABSTRACT:
Aptamers are discovered from random oligonucleotide libraries by an   in vitro  selection process, usually called SELEX (Systematic Evolution of   Ligands by EXponential enrichment). The conventional SELEX method   usually takes multiple rounds of selection and amplification, which are   labor-intensive and time-consuming. Recently developed high-throughput   sequencing (HTS) technologies could offer great advantages in aptamer   discovery. Here we demonstrated the application of HTS in the selection   of RNA aptamers, which dramatically reduced the number of selection   cycles and greatly shortened the discovery process. Over-represented   libraries were selected against the target, followed by HTS, where   aptamer candidates were revealed by counting their frequency of   occurrence. In fact, the known RNA aptamer for human factor IXa (FIXa)   was successfully selected from the over-represented m=16 chimeric   library after a single round of selection. This successful single-pass   aptamer selection could be attributed to three factors:   over-representation in the initial library; efficient separation in the   partitioning step and the massive number of sequences generated by HTS.   An unprecedented family of aptamers for FIXa with relatively high   affinity ( K d   = 220∼1100 nM) was indentified from   the sparsely represented RNA library with m=35 in two rounds of   selection, where the first round of selection was performed to reduce   complexity and give the subpool over-representation. Three aptamers   demonstrated substantial inhibition of FIXa activity. These new m=35 RNA   aptamers are all consistent with an aptamer motif,   Q1-L1-Q2-L2-Q3-L3-Q4-Tail, and they probably form a quadruplex. Although   observed with low counts, the top sequences selected for FIXa from an   m=22 RNA library could form the same qudraplex motif as the new m=35  RNA  aptamer sequences. It appears that the qudraplex motif is favored  by  FIXa under current library design and selection conditions.