$TITLE:
Investigation of Coenzyme Q10 Production in Sporidiobolus johnsonii

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:
Affinity purification, Coenzyme q10, Fermentation, Purification, Saposin b, Sporidiobolus johnsonii

$ABSTRACT:
There is considerable current interest in CoenzymeQ10 (CoQ10) from a  medical perspective. Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) plays a critical role in  energy production in humans.  Low levels of CoQ10 have been linked to  diseases such as Parkinson's and Huntingtons's disease.  CoQ10 levels  decrease as we age, and the use of statin drugs also lowers CoQ10  levels.  Oral supplementation increases CoQ10 levels.  However, a lack  of industrial sources of CoQ10 and the difficulty in CoQ10 purification  has resulted in a need to solve both of these problems.   Sporidiobolus johnsonii  ( S. johnsonii  ) has been reported to produce CoQ10 in papers that used only standards  on thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and also suggested the production of  Coenzyme Q9 (CoQ9). This work set out to verify CoQ9/CoQ10 production  in  S. johnsonii  and quantify as appropriate.  We show that  S. johnsonii  produces CoQ10, but find no evidence for CoQ9 biosynthesis. The  specific production of CoQ10 was noted at 10 mg / g dry cell weight  (DCW) in media supplemented with  para  -hydroxy benzoic acid (HBA).  This makes  S. johnsonii  a naturally high CoQ10 producer. Identification of a closely eluting  side product under normal phase chromatography is reported.  Current  purification methods for CoQ10 are difficult and expensive.  A protein  based purification method may alleviate the current problems associated  with typical LC purification.  Saposin B (sapB) has been shown to bind  with CoQ10 at selective pH's.  We hypothesized that utilizing a sapB  coated support resin that an affinity purification method for CoQ10  could be produced.  To this end, sapB was recombinantly expressed by  fermentation producing 105 mg sapB per liter.  The recombinant sapB was  characterized beyond what is currently in literature.  This includes pH  dependent circular dichroism demonstrating a pH dependent alpha-helical  structure, and investigation into the presence and effect of the  disulfide bonds and their effect upon thermal stability and resin  binding.  The affinity resin was made by binding sapB via a his-tag to a  sepharose IMAC bead.  This work demonstrates that CoQ10 can be bound by  a sapB based affinity resin with pH controlled binding and release.