$TITLE:
Africentrism and Gender Role Identification: Exploring the Relationship between Appearance Commentary and Body Image

$DEPARTMENT:
Counseling and Human Services

$KEYWORDS:
African American Women, Africentrism, Appearance Commentary, Body Satisfaction, Gender Role, Social Physique Anxiety

$ABSTRACT:
One of the most prominent sources of body image disturbance is  sociocultural because individuals, especially women, are bombarded with messages  regarding their physiques and what is considered physically attractive (Cash  & Pruzinsky, 2002; Grogan, 1999; Ludwig & Brownell, 1999.). These  messages can be positive or negative, and they come from a variety of sources  such as friends, family and the media (Cash & Pruzinsky, 2002). African  American women have been found to report greater body satisfaction (Altabe,  1998; Bissell, 2002; Breitkopf, Littleton, & Berenson, 2007) and lower  levels of social physique anxiety in comparison to White women (Russell &  Cox, 2003; Hasse, Mountord, & Waller, 2007). Researchers have attributed  these differences to African American women's racial identification and gender  role identification (Hesse-Biber, howling Leavy, & Lovejoy, 2004). However,  very few studies have focused exclusively on African American women and within  group differences. The studies exploring the specific traditional cultural  values that help shape African American women's body image beliefs are also  scarce. This study examined the moderating effects of adherence to Africentric  values and gender role identification on the relationship between appearance  commentary and body image related constructs. One hundred and fifteen  participants were recruited through a social networking site to complete on-line  surveys. Paper and pencil versions of the survey were also administered to 65  participants recruited in a predominantly African American community in the  Northeast. Hierarchical regressions revealed that high allegiance to Africentric  cultural values buffered the negative effects of social pressure from media  sources to be thin on body satisfaction and social physique anxiety. Contrarily,  high allegiance to Africentric values promoted decreased body satisfaction along  with reports of frequent exposure to interpersonal negative appearance  commentary. Femininity was found to promote increased social physique anxiety in  conjunction with participants' reports of receiving infrequent positive  appearance feedback. This study provides additional insight into the factors  that contribute to body image resilience. Implications for mental health  counselors and recommendations for future research are addressed.