$TITLE:
Characteristics of closest friends: A comparison among U.S., international and Third Culture college students

$DEPARTMENT:
Counseling and Human Services

$KEYWORDS:
College adjustment, Friendship, Global nomads, Sojourners, Third Culture Kids, Transnational transition, TCKs, United States, International students

$ABSTRACT:
This study investigates the characteristics of closest friends of female  college students among three subcultural groups that were categorized  based on their previous transnational transition experience(s): first  cultural college students who did not have any transnational transition,  second cultural college students who had only one transnational  transition upon their college entry, and third culture college students  who had more than one transnational transition during their childhood.  Of the few studies that have examined young adult friendship, none of  them have investigated College Third Culture Kids' (CTCKs) subjective  perceptions of their closest friends. Prior studies and observations  indicated the uniqueness and struggles of CTCKs' social relationships  with peers in the U.S. The current study utilizes a Q methodology to  examine the perceptions of female college students of the  characteristics of their closest friends. Forty-five female college  students sorted 45 statements expressing various opinions about the  individual and behavioral characteristics of their closest friends on a  scale from "Most Characteristic" (+4) to "Least Characteristic" (-4).  Age and gender were controlled. In particular, differences and  similarities of the characteristics of their closest friends between  CTCKs and non-CTCKs were compared. As a result, three distinctive factor  groups emerged representing three different patterns of characteristics  of closest friends among the participants: the  Socially Connected  group (friend as playfellow), the  Emotionally Connected  group (friend as nurturer and complement), and the Functionally  Connected group (friend as resource). Approximately 72 percent of the  total participants were loaded on one of the three different friendship  factor groups. Each subcultural group showed a strong preference toward a  particular factor group. Ten CTKCs (out of 15 total CTCKs) were loaded  in one of the three different factor groups. In particular, 50 percent  of the CTCKs participants were loaded on the  Functionally Connected  friendship type, which is characterized as being responsible,  intelligent, independent, and creative and less characterized as being  physically attractive or easy-going. On the other hand, most of the  non-CTCKs were loaded on either the  Socially Connected  friendship type, characterized as being easy-going, out-going, social, and energetic or the  Emotionally Connected  friendship type, characterized as being honest, loyal, accepted,  supportive, and intimate. The current findings extend the literature on  female college students' friendships in the U.S., and the findings of  the current study are mostly consistent with previous assertions that  CTCKs and non-CTCKs prefer different characteristics in their closest  friends. In particular, the findings of the current study have yielded  important clinical and educational implications for higher education.  CTCKs characterized with the  Socially Connected  and  Emotionally Connected  friendship types could serve as cultural bridges to facilitate genuine multiculturalism on U.S. campuses.