$TITLE:
Effects Of Calcium Addition On Structure And Bioavailability Of Soil Organic Matter

$DEPARTMENT:
Civil and Environmental Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Calcium treatment, Elemental analysis, Hot water extractable organic matter, Molecular mixing model, NMR, Soil organic matter

$ABSTRACT:
The northeastern USA has a long history of acid rain, which has  impacted soil fertility and raised concerns about the sustainability of the  forests in the region. To facilitate recovery of these forests, calcium  addition, in the form of wollastonite, was evaluated as a remedial tool at  Hubbard Brook Experimental Forests in New Hampshire, USA. In order to study the  effects of these amendments on soil organic matter and soil microbes, I  characterized the structural chemistry of soil organic matter (SOM) and its  hot-water extractable organic matter (HWEOM) fraction for Hubbard Brook soils  and studied the changes in the structure of SOM and HWEOM after short- and  long-term calcium amendment. I found that the C:N ratios for these soils were  27.2 and 22.8 in Oi and Oe horizons, respectively, and ranged from 20.8 to 22.6  in the Oa horizon. Hot-water extractable organic matter (HWEOM), which was 3.39%  of soil C in Oi horizon and 0.93-1.14% in Oe and Oa horizons, had much lower C:N  ratios than whole soil values, at 19.1 in Oie horizon, 14.8 in Oe horizon, and  13.5-14.8 in Oa horizon. This pattern suggests that HWEOM contains an abundance  of microbially derived organic matter. The HWEOM also exhibited higher H:C  ratios and a position in van Krevelen diagram closer to carbohydrates compared  to the whole soil. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) analyses revealed that HWEOM  was higher in O-alkyl C (50-70%) than the soil from which it was extracted  (40-55%), further indicating its richness in carbohydrates, which was also  confirmed by a molecular mixing model. The soil organic matter decreased in its  O-alkyl C and carbohydrate proportion with soil depth due to decomposition and  increased in its refractory fraction, represented by alkyl C and lipids  proportion. These patterns were opposite in HWEOM, indicating an increased  solubility of residual carbohydrate structures during the course of  decomposition. The HWEOM was richer than soil in both labile organic matter and  microbial biomass, though microbial biomass could account for no more than 40%  of the extracted C.In a short-term calcium treatment study, I found a decrease in the  HWEOM content of soils treated with high amounts of calcium (4250 kg Ca/ha), but  not in low Ca (850 kg Ca/ha) treatments, two years after the treatment. This  decrease was attributed to a decreased extractability of labile water-soluble  structures represented by HWEOM, and not due to significant changes in SOM  structure, as revealed by a biodegradation study and NMR spectroscopy. The  biodegradation study showed that the HWEOM extracted from high Ca treated plots  showed no significant difference in degradation compared to the reference plots,  indicating that once extracted, the HWEOM structures are bioavailable. NMR  spectroscopy revealed no significant changes in O-alkyl structures in calcium  treated plots for the whole soil but showed a decrease in the O-alkyl C content  of HWEOM, again suggesting that only the extractability of the labile structures  has been affected. C:N ratios also were not found to differ between reference  and Ca treated plots. Phosphorous treatment, with or without extra calcium, did  not bring any significant effects on the structural composition of the soil  organic matter. In the long-term (7-9 years) calcium treatment effects were only  visible in the high-elevation spruce/fir/zone and not at lower  elevations.