$TITLE:
Behind every man: Media construction of wives at the center of political sex scandals

$DEPARTMENT:
Mass Communications

$KEYWORDS:
Gender, Media coverage, Political wives, Politics, Scandal, Sex scandals, Media

$ABSTRACT:
The U.S. media has  paid significant attention to the sexual transgressions of male  politicians, often with front-page and top-of-the-hour news coverage.  Today's political sex scandals in America are stories of powerful men  who have been exposed: caught engaging in illicit behavior in private,  which they never intended to be made public. This "reveal" - publicized  by media outlets - results in tarnished reputations that can pose a  temporary or permanent effect to the transgressor. Yet behind many  scandalized politicians, accused of sexual liaisons outside of the  marriage, there is a woman, his wife. She also finds herself under the  harsh glare of the media spotlight even though she did not engage in  illicit activity. Print reports, Twitter feeds, radio spots, news  broadcasts and blogs all analyze her public response to her husband's  private misdeeds. This dissertation takes a mixed-methods approach to  investigate how the media construct political wives whose husbands have  been tarnished by sexual scandal. At the core of this investigation is  the analysis of the wife's presence - or absence - from a key media  event: The press conference where the politician acknowledges, spins or  denies extramarital sexual activity.The  examples in the past few years of married, political elites behaving  badly are plentiful. These examples are former New Jersey Governor James  McGreevey (2004); former Idaho Senator Larry Craig (2007); Louisiana  Senator David Vitter (2007); former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer  (2008); former U.S. Representative Tim Mahoney (2008); former South  Carolina Governor Mark Sanford (2009); Nevada senator John Ensign  (2009). This study employs a feminist critical theory lens to media  coverage of these scandal events. Methodology includes textual analysis  and content analysis of printed text, photographs and televised press  conferences as covered in the  New York Times, Washington Post, USA Today, CNN.com,  and the politician's hometown papers. Video clips of each politician's  press conference are taken from YouTube. Print articles are obtained  via microfilm.By focusing on a cluster of  scandals within a specific time period we can begin to see emerging  patterns in media coverage of these events, as well as social  expectations of women whose husbands have been scandalized. Ultimately  this analysis can further our understanding of recurring cultural  messages of "wifeness," my term for acts associated with being and  performing "Wife." My conclusions stem from previous literature on the  two-person, single career marriage. As this study shows, when a woman  publicly performs "wifeness," her often silent presence at the podium  alongside her husband can shame him, since she represents the public  evidence of his private transgressions. However, she also channels the  possibility of forgiveness. Ultimately, findings suggest that the news  media, while vocally critical of the wife's presence at the press  conference, continue to re(produce) gender stereotypes surrounding  wifeness. Additionally, the experiences of political wives are co-opted  by a public who fears their position, and their faces become symbolic of  betrayed wives everywhere.