$TITLE:
Age-Related Changes in Listening Effort for Various Types of Masker Noises

$DEPARTMENT:
Communication Sciences and Disorders

$KEYWORDS:
Aging, Hearing Loss, Listening Effort, Speech Recognition

$ABSTRACT:
It is well established that older listeners have more difficulty  understanding speech in background noise than younger listeners (e.g. Dubno et.  al., 1984). Some have attributed this increased difficulty to peripheral hearing  loss, while others suggest that older listeners may perceive listening in noise  as difficult and effortful because it requires them to exert more cognitive  resources (Desjardins et. al., 2009). The purpose of the present study was to  directly evaluate the relationship between cognitive function, listening effort  and speech recognition for a group of younger and older normal hearing adults,  and a group of older adults with hearing impairment, in various types of  background noise.A dual-task paradigm was used to objectively evaluate listening  effort. The primary task required participants to repeat sentences presented in  three different background noise masker conditions (e.g. Two-Talker (TT),  Six-Talker (SIX), Speech-Shaped Noise (SSN)). The secondary task was a digital  visual pursuit rotor tracking test (DPRT), for which participants were  instructed to use a computer mouse to track a moving target around an ellipse  that was displayed on a computer screen. Each task was presented separately and  concurrently at a fixed speech recognition performance level of 76% correct. In  addition, participants' subjectively rated how easy it was to listen to the  sentences in each masker condition on a scale from 0 (e.g. very difficult) to  100 (e.g. very easy). Last, participants completed a battery of cognitive tests  which measured working memory (Reading Span test), processing speed (DSST) and  selective attention (Stroop test) ability.Results revealed that participants' working memory and processing  speed ability were significantly related to their speech recognition performance  in noise in all three background noise masker conditions. Both groups of older  participants expended significantly more listening effort than younger  participants in the SSN and TT masker conditions. For each group of  participants, there were no significant differences in listening effort measured  across the masker conditions, with the exception of the younger participants who  expended more effort listening in the SIX masker condition compared to the SSN  condition. All participants' listening effort expended on the TT and SSN masker  conditions was significantly correlated with their working memory and processing  speed performance. Participants' subjective ratings of listening effort did not  correlate with their objective measures of listening effort on any of the  listening conditions. Findings from the present study indicate that older  adults, independent of peripheral hearing loss, require more cognitive resources  than younger adults to understand speech in background noise.