$TITLE:
Tectonic history of the East Gobi Fault Zone, southeastern Mongolia: An integrated study using structural geology, geochronology, and thermochronology

$DEPARTMENT:
Earth Sciences

$KEYWORDS:
Mongolia, East Gobi Fault zone, Tectonic history, East Gobi basin

$ABSTRACT:
Asia is an ideal  natural laboratory to study the processes of continental growth and  intracontinental deformation. Throughout the Paleozoic-Cenozoic numerous  collisional orogenies between arcs, microcontinents, and cratonic  blocks have built the continent, resulting in a complex tectonic setting  where former collisional zones are commonly reactivated to accommodate  the far-field effects of convergent plate boundary forces.In  southeastern Mongolia, the East Gobi Fault Zone (EGFZ) records a  complex tectonic history of Late Paleozoic arc genesis, continent-arc  collision, and subsequent Mesozoic-Cenozoic intracontinental  deformation, making it an ideal location to study the processes of arc  accretion and intracontinental deformation within the Asian  subcontinent. This study used multiple methods to better constrain the  tectonic history of the EGFZ. U-Pb zircon dating and microstructural  analysis revealed that the protoliths to high-grade/high-strain basement  in southeastern Mongolia, long suspected to be Precambrian in age,  formed during Paleozoic-Mesozoic arc magmatism and continent-arc  collision. These results do not support the existence of large swaths of  Precambrian basement in southern Mongolia, long cited as evidence for  the South Gobi Microcontinent. Instead they emphasize the heterogeneous,  highly-deformed nature of the rocks found throughout this region.Low-temperature  thermochronology of exposed basement revealed that most exhumation  along the EGFZ occurred during periods of intracontinental deformation  during Late Triassic sinistral transtension(?) and late Early-Middle  Jurassic shortening. Late Early-Middle Jurassic shortening is associated  with the emplacement of large thrust sheets in the southern EGFZ.  Reheating is recorded during Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous extension,  likely resulting from increased heat flow, volcanism, and burial by  syn-rift sediments.Analysis of  low-temperature brittle structures along the fault zone revealed two  phases of Cenozoic deformation. The first phase accommodated ~120 km of  sinistral displacement along ENE-NE-striking, left stepping faults. It  crosscuts Eocene and Oligocene strata but not Quaternary surface  deposits. The second phase is recorded by mainly NW-W striking  sinistral, N-NE-striking dextral, and W or E-dipping thrust faults.  Where observed, displacements are not greater than a few kilometers.  Phase 2 crosscuts Quaternary surface deposits and the kinematics of  moderate earthquakes in the region indicate it is still active.