$TITLE:
Geochemical characterization of groundwater flow processes in a large patterned peatland

$DEPARTMENT:
Earth Sciences

$KEYWORDS:
Peatlands, Groundwater flow, Pore water, Geochemical mixing

$ABSTRACT:
For several decades,  scientists have studied the hydrology and geochemistry of Northern  peatlands with respect to their influence on potential climate change.  The complex hydrology and geochemistry in peatlands lead to unique  vegetation, which sequesters carbon in peat soils. Peatlands also  creates biogeochemical conditions that induce release of greenhouse  gases carbon dioxide and methane. Much of what we know about peatland  hydrology and ecology evolved from over 30 years of research in the  Glacial Lake Agassiz Peatlands (GLAP), MN. Here, gaseous methane,  produced at depth, was first identified as a major potential contributor  of methane flux to the atmosphere, along with diffusive transport to  the atmosphere. The deep methane forms at the interface between downward  moving groundwater under raised bogs and upwards moving groundwater  from underlying mineral soils. It remains uncertain how groundwater  upwells into these peatlands, keeps the peat saturated, and sustains  vegetation growth, even under drought conditions. Moreover, seasonal  variability in peatland hydrology controls dissolved organic carbon  (DOC) mineralization, consequently releasing or sequestering greenhouse  gases.In my dissertation, I have  investigated three aspects of the peatland geochemical puzzle that bear  on solute movement in large circumboreal peatlands and alter hydrology  within peat due to methane formation. For this work, I sampled pore  water from seven bog-fen complexes in the study area over a period of  three years for geochemical and isotopic analyses.In  chapter 1, I report the results of synnoptic studies of the pore water  chemical and isotopic composition in multiple bog-fen complexes found in  different hydrogeologic settings. This study was designed to better  characterize the geochemical mixing and sources of pore water in peat.  In chapter 2, I addressed the effect of decadal scale seasonal wet-dry  cycles on the geochemical and isotopic composition of peat pore water  and net changes in the rate of deep methanogenesis. In the 3 rd  chapter, I heuristically assessed how recharging acidic water and  upwelling minerotropic water affect the pore water composition. For  this, I built a module in a geochemical computational program PHREEQC,  incorporating organic acid dissociation constants to assess the  acid-base equilibrium of pore waters in peat.