$TITLE:
Essays on Testing Hypotheses When Non-stationarity Exists in Panel Data Models

$DEPARTMENT:
Economics

$KEYWORDS:
Panel data, Feasible GLS estimator, F-statistic, Factor structure

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation consists of two essays on testing hypotheses in  panel data models when non-stationarity exists in the model. This is done under  the high-dimensional framework where both n (cross-section dimension) and T  (time series dimension) are large. In the first essay, I discuss the limiting  distribution of the t-statistic; using different panel data estimators and  propose using the t-statistic based on Feasible GLS estimator. In the second  essay, I develop the bootstrap F-statistic for cross-sectional independence in a  panel data model with factor structure.The first essay considers the problem of hypotheses testing in a  simple panel data regression model with random individual effects and serially  correlated disturbances. Following Baltagi, Kao and Liu (2008), I allow for the  possibility of non-stationarity in the regressor and/or the disturbance term.  While Baltagi et al. (2008) focus on the asymptotic properties and distributions  of the standard panel data estimators, this essay focuses on test of hypotheses  in this setting. One important finding, is that unlike the time series case, one  does not necessarily need to rely on the "super-efficient" type AR estimator by  Perron and Yabu (2009) to make inference in panel data. In fact, I show that the  simple t-ratio always converges to the standard normal distribution regardless  of whether the disturbances and/or the regressor are stationary. One caveat is  that this may not be robust to heteroskedasticity of the error terms, but it is  robust to heterogenous AR parameters across individuals. The Monte Carlo  simulations in support of all the results are also provided in this  essay.The second essay discusses testing hypotheses of cross-sectional  dependence in a panel data model with an introduction of factor structure.  Following Bai (2003, 2004, 2009) and Bai, Kao and Ng (2009), I again allow for  the possibility of non-stationarity in the regressor and the factor. I give  attention to test of hypotheses using F-tests in this setting. The limiting  distribution of F-statistics under the high-dimensional framework has not been  derived yet in the literature perhaps because of its theoretical complexity. To  circumvent this difficulty, this essay suggests the use of wild bootstrap  F-tests based on simulation results under various cases where both regressors  and factors can be stationary or non-stationary. The Monte Carlo results show  that the bootstrap F-tests perform well in testing cross-sectional independence  and are recommended in practice. They have the advantage of being feasible even  when we do not observe the factors and do not require for formal theoretical  approximations. It is also shown that the bootstrap F-tests are robust to  heteroskedasticity but sensitive to serial correlation.