$TITLE:
Noise-Enhanced and Human Visual System-Driven Image Processing: Algorithms and Performance Limits

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Computer Vision, Human Visual System, Image Processing, Medical Imaging, Performance Limits, Stochastic Resonance Noise

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation investigates the problem of image processing  based on stochastic resonance (SR) noise and human visual system (HVS)  properties, where several novel frameworks and algorithms for object detection  in images, image enhancement and image segmentation as well as the method to  estimate the performance limit of image segmentation algorithms are developed.Object detection in images is a fundamental problem whose goal is  to make a decision if the object of interest is present or absent in a given  image. We develop a framework and algorithm to enhance the detection performance  of suboptimal detectors using SR noise, where we add a suitable dose of noise  into the original image data and obtain the performance improvement.  Micro-calcification detection is employed in this dissertation as an  illustrative example. The comparative experiments with a large number of images  verify the efficiency of the presented approach.Image enhancement plays an important role and is widely used in  various vision tasks. We develop two image enhancement approaches. One is based  on SR noise, HVS-driven image quality evaluation metrics and the constrained  multi-objective optimization (MOO) technique, which aims at refining the  existing suboptimal image enhancement methods. Another is based on the selective  enhancement framework, under which we develop several image enhancement  algorithms. The two approaches are applied to many low quality images, and they  outperform many existing enhancement algorithms.Image segmentation is critical to image analysis. We present two  segmentation algorithms driven by HVS properties, where we incorporate the human  visual perception factors into the segmentation procedure and encode the prior  expectation on the segmentation results into the objective functions through  Markov random fields (MRF). Our experimental results show that the presented  algorithms achieve higher segmentation accuracy than many representative  segmentation and clustering algorithms available in the literature.Performance limit, or performance bound, is very useful to  evaluate different image segmentation algorithms and to analyze the  segmentability of the given image content. We formulate image segmentation as a  parameter estimation problem and derive a lower bound on the segmentation error,  i.e., the mean square error (MSE) of the pixel labels considered in our work,  using a modified Cramér-Rao bound (CRB). The derivation is based on the biased  estimator assumption, whose reasonability is verified in this dissertation.  Experimental results demonstrate the validity of the derived bound.