$TITLE:
Application-oriented communication protocols for high-speed networks

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Computer science, Electrical engineering, protocols

$ABSTRACT:
The proliferation of high-speed networks has led to the emergence of new applications with requirements that are more diverse than those of traditional applications. Existing implementations of standard communication protocols were designed for networks that were operating at several kbps. These implementations cannot properly utilize the performance of the emerging high-speed networks. Moreover, these protocols do not have the flexibility needed to support the diversity in applications requirements.There is neither a single set of protocol mechanisms nor one implementation technique that fits different requirements of applications and networks characteristics. For example, it might be suitable to use window-based mechanisms to control data flow for applications with low bandwidth requirements and in low propagation delay networks. However, high-throughput applications should be controlled using rate-based mechanisms. Therefore, we present a framework for application-oriented communication protocols, where protocol configurations can be adaptively generated to best meet applications requirements. A novel model for implementing application-oriented communication protocols is developed. Using this model, a communication protocol is viewed as a network of protocol functions. Based on different implementations of protocol functions (e.g., error correction can be implemented using either go-back-n or selective retransmission mechanisms), multiple protocol configurations can run concurrently using the same application-oriented communication protocol. Each protocol configuration is tailored to a particular type of application. We study the performance of the application-oriented communication protocol implemented using this network-based model on different parallel systems.We also examine how Quality of Service (QoS) requirements for applications can be guaranteed by application-oriented communication protocols at connection ends. In addition, an algorithm is developed to verify that packets' delay bounds required by their originating applications will be maintained. Furthermore, we explore how application-oriented communication protocols can be used in ATM networks to support different applications requirements.