$TITLE:
Network-aware Active Wardens in IPv6

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
active warden, covert channel, IPv6, security

$ABSTRACT:
Every day the world grows more and more dependent on digital  communication. Technologies like e-mail or the World Wide Web that not so long  ago were considered experimental, have first become accepted and then  indispensable tools of everyday life. New communication technologies built on  top of the existing ones continuously race to provide newer and better  functionality. Even established communication media like books, radio, or  television have become digital in an effort to avoid extinction.    In this torrent of digital communication a constant struggle takes  place. On one hand, people, organizations, companies and countries attempt to  control the ongoing communications and subject them to their policies and laws.  On the other hand, there oftentimes is a need to ensure and protect the  anonymity and privacy of the very same communications.    Neither side in this struggle is necessarily noble or malicious. We can  easily imagine that in presence of oppressive censorship two parties might have  a legitimate reason to communicate covertly. And at the same time, the use of  digital communications for business, military, and also criminal purposes gives  equally compelling reasons for monitoring them thoroughly.    Covert channels are communication mechanisms that were never intended  nor designed to carry information. As such, they are often able to act ``below''  the notice of mechanisms designed to enforce security policies. Therefore, using  covert channels it might be possible to establish a covert communication that  escapes notice of the enforcement mechanism in place. Any covert channel present  in digital communications offers a possibility of achieving a secret, and  therefore unmonitored, communication. There have been numerous studies  investigating possibilities of hiding information in digital images, audio  streams, videos, etc. We turn our attention to the covert channels that exist in  the digital networks themselves, that is in the digital communication  protocols.    Currently, one of the most ubiquitous protocols in deployment is the  Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4). Its universal presence and range make it an  ideal candidate for covert channel investigation. However, IPv4 is approaching  the end of its dominance as its address space nears exhaustion. This imminent  exhaustion of IPv4 address space will soon force a mass migration towards  Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) expressly designed as its successor. While  the protocol itself is already over a decade old, its adoption is still in its  infancy. The low acceptance of IPv6 results in an insufficient understanding of  its security properties.    We investigated the protocols forming the foundation of the next  generation Internet, Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) and Internet Control  Message Protocol (ICMPv6) and found numerous covert channels. In order to  properly assess their capabilities and performance, we built  cctool, a comprehensive covert channel tool.  Finally, we considered countermeasures capable of defeating discovered covert  channels. For this purpose we extended the previously existing notions of active  wardens to equip them with the knowledge of the surrounding network and allow  them to more effectively fulfill their role.