$TITLE:
Interdomain traffic engineering on a bandwidth broker-supported diffserv Internet

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Interdomain, Traffic, Bandwidth, Diffserv, Internet

$ABSTRACT:
As the Internet evolves, and new bandwidth-consuming multimedia applications become more common, it becomes necessary to provide quality of service (QoS) in the Internet. QoS provides a basis for network providers to offer a variety of services to customers with different cost, bandwidth, latency, and jitter requirements, which makes the network resources more valuable. To utilize valuable network resources efficiently, service providers need to engineer intra-domain and inter-domain traffic. In this dissertation we are addressing the inter-domain traffic engineering problem with emphasis on inter-domain QoS routing, which is the most important component of traffic engineering.This dissertation introduces a novel inter-domain QoS routing scheme that can scale over large networks. Our scheme is based on the notion of regions, which are collections of autonomous systems, and we represent the overall Internet topology as a collection of regions. Without introducing a hierarchy, we employed a link-state based source specified routing protocol inside regions. Edge-to-edge paths are calculated as a concatenation of subpaths that are calculated by individual domains in different regions. We analyzed the scalability and path calculation capability of our routing approach. Analysis results indicate a tradeoff between the computation, communication, and storage scalability and the length of a calculated path; but the gain from the scalability always outweighs the loss from the increased path length. We extended an existing signaling protocol by adding explicit path setup, generic QoS support, and inter-domain label exchange capabilities. We also explained how this protocol can be used to exchange inter-domain labels, and how this can be used to establish an inter-domain label switched path. Finally we introduced an inter-domain traffic engineering architecture which comprises of the components we mentioned above, and explained how inter-domain QoS routing, signaling, and path establishment is coordinated through a Bandwidth Broker to provide an inter-domain traffic engineering capability. We analyzed the effectiveness of the traffic engineering approach through simulations, and results suggest that our architecture can efficiently utilize inter-domain resources if QoS requirements can be met.