$TITLE:
Computational Identification of cis-Regulatory Elements and Prediction of Gene Expression Level

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Cis-elements, Gene expression level prediction, Gene regulation, Hammer, Motifs identification, Structured motifs

$ABSTRACT:
The dissertation focuses on developing computational methods to discover   cis  -elements in promoter region of co-regulated genes and predict gene expression level using identified  cis  -elements.Discovering  cis  -elements in promoter region of co-regulated genes is important in  molecular biology research and recently received extensive attention. In  my Ph.D. research I developed an algorithm that is faster and more  accurate than well-known tools currently in use to identify   cis  -elements. The HAMMER algorithm searches for subsequences of desired  length whose frequency of occurrence is relatively high, while  accounting for slightly perturbed variants using hash table and modulo  arithmetic. Candidate   cis  -elements are evaluated using  profile matrices and higher-order Markov background model. Simulation  results show that the HAMMER algorithm discovers more  cis  -elements present in the test sequences when compared with two widely  used motif-discovery tools (MDScan and AlignACE). The HAMMER algorithm  also produces very promising results on real data set which contain many  known  cis  -elements.Based on the  cis  -elements found by HAMMER algrithm, I further developed an algorithm to  identify structured motifs which consists of two simpler patterns ( half-sites  ) separated from each other by a gap, with no restriction on the number  of nucleotides that may occur within the gap. First, HAMMER algorithm  is used to search for individual   cis  -elements which will be  used as half-sites to create structured motifs. These structured motifs  are then evaluated based on the relative frequency of the half-sites as  well as the distribution of gap length. Unlike other recent structured  motif detection algorithm, the new algorithm does not require the gap  length to be prespecified. The algorithm has successfully extracted  structured motifs on synthetic data and real testing data.Gene expression level is influenced significantly by the presence or absence of  cis  -elements. I developed several classification systems in which the  occurrences of both activator and repressor motifs constitute important  inputs in predicting whether a gene will be up-regulated,  down-regulated, or neither. I have experimented with several approaches  for classification and best preformance was obtained using Support  Vector Machine models with linear kernels and a hierarchical structure.  On  Saccharomces cerevisiae  data, the SVM models yielded 71%  accuracy for 3-category classification (up-regulated, down-regulated,  neutral) and 85% accuracy for 2-category classification (up-regulated,  down-regulated).