$TITLE:
Detection and location estimation of a random signal source using sensor networks

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Location estimation, Sensor networks, Source localization

$ABSTRACT:
In this dissertation,  the problem of detection and localization of a random signal source is  considered using a network of sensors. The measurements received at  individual sensors are characterized by a probability density (or mass)  function. Formulating the detection problem as a binary hypothesis  testing problem, the design of a distributed detection system for  detecting the presence of a random signal source is considered. Both  cases of known and unknown signal parameters are considered. Design of  optimal fusion and local sensor rules are first discussed under the  assumption that sensor observations are conditionally independent over  space as well as time.However, while  observing a source of random signal, the sensor measurements may exhibit  significant spatial dependence, which should be incorporated to enhance  performance of the signal processing system. This dissertation  investigates the usage of copula theory to model the joint statistics of  sensor observations. Using copula theory, approximate joint probability  distribution functions can be constructed using the knowledge of  marginal distribution functions by employing copula functions that have  emerged as powerful tools for modeling dependence. Moreover, using  copula functions, non-linear dependence can be modeled. This is in  contrast to Pearson's correlation coefficient, which can characterize  only linear dependence. The problem of distributed detection using  dependent sensor observations is considered and a copula based solution  is discussed. The accuracy of parameter estimation may also get affected  by ignoring dependence between sensor observations. The design of a  copula based location estimator is also discussed in this dissertation.  Using simulated data, the copula based systems for detection and  location estimation are shown to result in superior performance as  compared to the assumptions of conditional independence or linear  dependence of sensor observations. A number of copula functions exist  and using an incorrect copula function can lead to model mismatch that  may result in performance degradation. Methods for selecting the most  suitable copula function from a finite set of copulas are also  discussed. The results obtained emphasize the importance of copula  selection.