$TITLE:
In the name of the father Lacanian reading of four white South African writers

$DEPARTMENT:
English

$KEYWORDS:
South Africa, White writers, Roy Campbell, J. M. Coetzee, Athol Fugard, Nadine Gordimer, Jacques Lacan, Literature

$ABSTRACT:
The subject of the father in South African literature is the subject of  labor, land, language, and liberation. This dissertation interrogates  the disconnectedness in the complex triangulation of the South African  family before, during, and after the apartheid regime. When Nadine  Gordimer says, for instance, that "For those whose ancestors went out  from their own to conquer, or quit their own because of persecution and  poverty, ancestry begins with grandfathers who emigrated," she signifies  the tragic "male/volence" of the racial struggle to dispossess and  repossess the South African geographical, economical, and socio-cultural  space. "There is (sic) an Old Country and a New Country," says  Gordimer, "the heredity of the one who is conceived there begins with  the New Country, the mongrel cross-patterns that have come about." All  the four writers, whose selected work are used in this study (Roy  Campbell: 1901-1957, Nadine Gordimer: 1923-, Athol Fugard: 1932-, and J.  M. Coetzee: 1940-), insist that "there is a particular responsibility  on the father" in the South African discourse. The four are chosen  because their works traverse the entire historical development of the  twentieth century South African politics. They are also among the most  globally prominent in their genres of South African writing of the past  one hundred years. Moreover, all four have collectively and separately  devoted their creative pursuit to the interpolation of the crisis of  fatherhood in South Africa. The dissertation is distributed into five  chapters, in addition to the introduction. The introduction outlines the  purpose of the dissertation, the problem, methodology, and significance  of the study, and chapter distribution. Chapter one explores the  various emanations and figurations of the father that are central to the  subject of this study, including the Lacanian father, the postcolonial  bastard, and the father in literature. Chapters two through five  respectively extrapolates on the poetry of Roy Campbell, the fiction of  Nadine Gordimer and J. M. Coetzee, and the drama of Athol Fugard for a  close reading of the image and signification of the father in South  African experience. The study explores the use of diction, metaphor, and  metonymy in the canonical narrative of the other, as well as the  writers' projection of a structured unconscious. The historicization of a  prevalent animal imagination would prove revelatory to the development  of, particularly, a white South African literary tradition.