$TITLE:
Development and Application of Explicitly Correlated Wave Function Based Methods for the Investigation of Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanomaterials

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:
chemistry, electron hole, explicitly correlated, quantum dots, theoretical chemistry

$ABSTRACT:
Semiconductor nanoparticles, or quantum dots (QDs), are well known to have very unique optical and electronic properties. These properties can be controlled and tailored as a function of several influential factors, including but not limited to the particle size and shape, effect of composition and heterojunction as well as the effect of ligand on the particle surface. This customizable nature leads to extensive experimental and theoretical research on the capabilities of these quantum dots for many application purposes.However, in order to be able to understand and thus further the development of these materials, one must first understand the fundamental interaction within these nanoparticles.In this thesis, I have developed a theoretical method which is called electron-hole explicitly correlated Hartee-Fock (eh-XCHF). It is a variational method for solving the electron-holeSchrodinger equation and has been used in this work to study electron-hole interaction in semiconductor quantum dots. The method was benchmarked with respect to a parabolic quantum dot system, andground state energy and electron-hole recombination probability were computed. Both of these properties were found to be in good agreement with expected results. Upon successful benchmarking,I have applied the eh-XCHF method to study optical properties of several quantum dot systems including the effect of dot size on exciton binding energy and recombination probability in  a CdSe quantum dot, the effect of shape on a CdSe quantum dot, the effect of heterojunction on a CdSe/ZnS quantum dot and the effect of quantum dot-biomolecule interaction within a CdSe-firefly Luciferase protein conjugate system. As metrics for assessing the effect of these influencers on the electron-hole interaction, the exciton binding energy, electron-hole recombination probability and the average electron-hole separation distance have been computed. These excitonic properties have been found to be strongly infuenced by the changing composition of the particle. It has also been found through this work that the explicitly correlated method performs very well when computing these properties as it provides a feasible computational route to compare to both experimental and other theoretical results.