$TITLE:
Three Essays on Testing for Cross-Sectional Dependence and Specification in Large Panel Data Models

$DEPARTMENT:
Economics

$KEYWORDS:
Cross-sectional Dependence, Large N Large T, Panel Data Models, Serial Correlation, Sphericity, Tests of Specification

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation consists of three essays on testing for cross-sectional dependence and specification in large panel data models. The first two essays are based on the papers joint with Prof. Badi H. Baltagi and Prof. Chihwa Kao; the third essay is based on the working paper joint with Prof. Lee. The first essay considers testing for Sphericity with non-normality in a fixed effects panel data model. The second essay considers testing for cross-sectional dependence in heterogeneous large N and large T panel data models allowing error serial correlation. The third  essay considers the tests of specification in large N and large T dynamic panel data models.The first essay proposes a test for sphericity in a fixedeffects panel data regression model which is robust to non-normality of thedisturbances. It builds up on the work of Chen, Zhang and Zhong (2010) whouse $U$-statistics to test for sphericity of the variance-covariance matrixin statistics. Since the errors are unobservable, the residuals from thefixed effects regression are used. The limiting distribution of the proposedtest statistic is derived. Additionally, its finite sample properties areexamined using Monte Carlo simulations.The second essay considers the problem of testing cross-sectional dependence inlarge panel data models with serially correlated errors. It finds thatexisting tests for cross-sectional independence encounter size distortionswith serial correlation in the errors. To control the size, itproposes a modification of Pesaran's CD\ test to account for seriallycorrelation of an unknown form in the error term. We derive the limitingdistribution of this test as $\left(  N,T\right)  \rightarrow\infty$. The testis distribution free and allows for unknown forms of serial correlation in theerrors. Monte Carlo simulations show that the test has good size and power forlarge panels when serial correlation in the errors are present.The third essay considers the tests of specification,including the tests for serial correlation and the tests of overidentifyingrestrictions, for large dynamic panel data models.\ The test statistics arebuilt upon the two-step GMM estimations using three different instrumentmatrices: the block-diagonal matrix with a full set of all availableinstruments, the block-diagonal matrix with a subset of all availableinstruments and the collapsed matrix with a subset of all availableinstruments. It shows that the conventional Sargan's test of overidentifyingrestrictions (Arellano and Bond (1991)) does not approximate to the chi-squaredistribution, when the number of instruments used, is relatively as large as$N$; therefore it proposes corrected Sargan's tests with different instrumentmatrices. The limiting distributions of all the tests of specification arederived as $N$ and $T$ go to infinity simultaneously. Power properties arediscussed under varieties of alternatives, The results show that the tests forserial correlation are powerful against different alternatives, and the powerof corrected Sargan's tests only increases as $N$ increases. Monte Carlosimulations confirm our theoretical findings, especially showing that thecorrected Sargan's tests have the correct size. Besides, it suggests using thecollapsed instrument matrix for the practical testing purpose.