$TITLE:
Introducing Wireless Grids Technology to the Field of Telemedicine

$DEPARTMENT:
Information Science and Technology

$KEYWORDS:
Ad Hoc Networking, Adult Learning, Healthcare, Military, Telemedicine, Wireless Grids

$ABSTRACT:
While telemedicine and technology-enabled education are not new concepts and have significant bodies of research, in depth application to management and treatment of veteran Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is relatively new.  The conflicts in the Southwest Asia over the last two decades have significantly increased the need for healthcare and support services for these returning warriors.  Creative thinking and innovative technologies are needed to meet the growing and changing demand of these patients in the face of many competing demands within the U.S. healthcare sector.This doctoral research study investigated the potential for a platform-agnostic (ad hoc) networking technology to serve as a trusted social networking and training platform for healthcare providers who are striving to provide quality healthcare that meets the needs of veterans suffering from PTSD and TBI.  This research study analyzed the effectiveness of a digitally networked environment to deliver desired training and certification outcomes in a military healthcare environment.  The level of acceptance of an ad hoc network technology (GridstreamRx) by healthcare professionals using it as an enabler of collaboration during the training process was evaluated.  The results also assessed the readiness of healthcare professionals to use this Information Communications Technology (ICT), or analogous new applications and services, to help them perform their healthcare responsibilities.This thesis study, accomplished with the support of the U.S. Army and National Science Foundation, took place at two large military medical centers over a twelve-month period of time.  Data was gathered from 568 healthcare professionals using quantitative survey instruments.  Ninety-six respondents provided additional quantitative and qualitative inputs at various times during a proscribed training regimen.  DeLone and McLean's 2003 Information System Success Model, modified by findings of more recent research, provided the theoretical lens for analyzing the data from 32 of the training participants in determining the perceived net benefit of the GridstreamRx technology.The data gathered for the study showed, at the 95% level of confidence, that a majority of the professionals of these two medical centers would perceive a positive net benefit from using GridstreamRx in a healthcare training environment.  The conclusion from this analysis was that not only are the healthcare providers in this study ready to use ICT and social networking in this professional setting, but also that GridstreamRx is an acceptable platform for performing these functions.The study participants provided input with respect to their priorities regarding information sharing techniques, functionality, and suggestions for improving the platform.  The outcomes confirmed that GridstreamRx can be a successful introduction of ad hoc networking to telemedicine.  This thesis concluded with recommendations for scholars and practitioners to pursue in the future; and should be followed up with further research and actions in order to build toward a Fully Integrated Virtual Healthcare Environment (FivHe).