$TITLE:
Composite Minimization: Proximity Algorithms and Their Applications

$DEPARTMENT:
Mathematics

$KEYWORDS:


$ABSTRACT:
Image and signal processing problems of practical importance, such as incompletedata recovery and compressed sensing, are often modeled as nonsmooth optimizationproblems whose objective functions are the sum of two terms, each of which is thecomposition of a prox-friendly function with a matrix. Therefore, there is a practicalneed to solve such optimization problems. Besides the nondifferentiability of theobjective functions of the associated optimization problems and the larger dimensionof the underlying images and signals, the sum of the objective functions is not,in general, prox-friendly, which makes solving the problems challenging. Many algorithms have been proposed in literature to attack these problems by making use of the prox-friendly functions in the problems. However, the efficiency of these algorithmsrelies heavily on the underlying structures of the matrices, particularly for large scaleoptimization problems. In this dissertation, we propose a novel algorithmic frameworkthat exploits the availability of the prox-friendly functions, without requiringany structural information of the matrices. This makes our algorithms suitable forlarge scale optimization problems of interest. We also prove the convergence of thedeveloped algorithms.This dissertation has three main parts. In part 1, we consider the minimizationof functions that are the sum of the compositions of prox-friendly functions withmatrices. We characterize the solutions to the associated optimization problems asthe solutions of fixed point equations that are formulated in terms of the proximity operators of the dual of the prox-friendly functions. By making use of the flexibilityprovided by this characterization, we develop a block Gauss-Seidel iterative schemefor finding a solution to the optimization problem and prove its convergence. Wediscuss the connection of our developed algorithms with some existing ones and pointout the advantages of our proposed scheme.In part 2, we give a comprehensive study on the computation of the proximityoperator of the ℓp-norm with 0 ≤ p < 1. Nonconvexity and non-smoothness havebeen recognized as important features of many optimization problems in image andsignal processing. The nonconvex, nonsmooth ℓp-regularization has been recognizedas an efficient tool to identify the sparsity of wavelet coefficients of an image or signalunder investigation. To solve an ℓp-regularized optimization problem, the proximityoperator of the ℓp-norm needs to be computed in an accurate and computationallyefficient way. We first study the general properties of the proximity operator of theℓp-norm. Then, we derive the explicit form of the proximity operators of the ℓp-normfor p ∈ {0, 1/2, 2/3, 1}. Using these explicit forms and the properties of the proximityoperator of the ℓp-norm, we develop an efficient algorithm to compute the proximityoperator of the ℓp-norm for any p between 0 and 1.In part 3, the usefulness of the research results developed in the previous twoparts is demonstrated in two types of applications, namely, image restoration andcompressed sensing. A comparison with the results from some existing algorithmsis also presented. For image restoration, the results developed in part 1 are applied to solve the ℓ2-TV and ℓ1-TV models. The resulting restored images have higherpeak signal-to-noise ratios and the developed algorithms require less CPU time thanstate-of-the-art algorithms. In addition, for compressed sensing applications, ouralgorithm has smaller ℓ2- and ℓ∞-errors and shorter computation times than state-ofthe-art algorithms. For compressed sensing with the ℓp-regularization, our numericalsimulations show smaller ℓ2- and ℓ∞-errors than that from the ℓ0-regularization andℓ1-regularization. In summary, our numerical simulations indicate that not only canour developed algorithms be applied to a wide variety of important optimizationproblems, but also they are more accurate and computationally efficient than stateof-the-art algorithms.