$TITLE:
Design of a High Capacity, Scalable, and Green Wireless Communication System Leveraging the Unlicensed Spectrum

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
4G Wireless Networks, Distributed & Parallel Processing, Interference Mitigiation, LTE-U, Performance Optimization, Unlicensed Spectrum

$ABSTRACT:
The stunning demand for mobile wireless data that has been recently growing at an exponential rate requires a several fold increase in spectrum. The use of unlicensed spectrum is thus critically needed to aid the existing licensed spectrum to meet such a huge mobile wireless data traffic growth demand in a cost effective manner. The deployment of Long Term Evolution (LTE) in the unlicensed spectrum (LTE-U) has recently been gaining significant industry momentum. The lower transmit power regulation of the unlicensed spectrum makes LTE deployment in the unlicensed spectrum suitable only for a small cell. A small cell utilizing LTE-L (LTE in licensed spectrum), and LTE-U (LTE in unlicensed spectrum) will therefore significantly reduce the total cost of ownership (TCO) of a small cell, while providing the additional mobile wireless data offload capacity from Macro Cell to small cell in LTE Heterogeneous Networks (HetNet), to meet such an increase in wireless data demand. The U.S. 5 GHz Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NII) bands that are currently under consideration for LTE deployment in the unlicensed spectrum contain only a limited number of 20 MHZ channels. Thus in a dense multi-operator deployment scenario, one or more LTE-U small cells have to co-exist and share the same 20 MHz unlicensed channel with each other and with the incumbent Wi-Fi.This dissertation presents a proactive small cell interference mitigation strategy for improving the spectral efficiency of LTE networks in the unlicensed spectrum. It describes the scenario and demonstrate via simulation results, that in the absence of an explicit interference mitigation mechanism, there will be a significant degradation in the overall LTE-U system performance for LTE-U co-channel co-existence in countries such as U.S. that do not mandate Listen-Before-Talk (LBT) regulations. An unlicensed spectrum Inter Cell Interference Coordination (usICIC) mechanism is then presented as a time-domain multiplexing technique for interference mitigation for the sharing of an unlicensed channel by multi-operator LTE-U small cells.  Through extensive simulation results, it is demonstrated that the proposed usICIC mechanism will result in 40% or more improvement in the overall LTE-U system performance (throughput) leading to increased wireless communication system capacity.The ever increasing demand for mobile wireless data is also resulting in a dramatic expansion of wireless network infrastructure by all service providers resulting in significant escalation in energy consumption by the wireless networks. This not only has an impact on the recurring operational expanse (OPEX) for the service providers, but importantly the resulting increase in greenhouse gas emission is not good for the environment. Energy efficiency has thus become one of the critical tenets in the design and deployment of Green wireless communication systems. Consequently the market trend for next-generation communication systems has been towards miniaturization to meet this stunning ever increasing demand for mobile wireless data, leading towards the need for scalable distributed and parallel processing system architecture that is energy efficient, and high capacity. Reducing cost and size while increasing capacity, ensuring scalability, and achieving energy efficiency requires several design paradigm shifts.This dissertation presents the design for a next generation wireless communication system that employs new energy efficient distributed and parallel processing system architecture to achieve these goals while leveraging the unlicensed spectrum to significantly increase (by a factor of two) the capacity of the wireless communication system. This design not only significantly reduces the upfront CAPEX, but also the recurring OPEX for the service providers to maintain their next generation wireless communication networks.