$TITLE:
Distributed Inference and Learning with Byzantine Data

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
Byzantines, Corrupted Data, Distributed Inference, Distributed Learning

$ABSTRACT:
We are living in an increasingly networked world with sensing networks of varying shapes and sizes: the network often comprises of several tiny devices (or nodes) communicating with each other via different topologies. To make the problem even more complicated, the nodes in the network can be unreliable due to a variety of reasons: noise, faults and attacks, thus, providingcorrupted data. Although the area of statistical inference has been an active area of research in thepast, distributed learning and inference in a networked setup with potentially unreliable componentshas only gained attention recently. The emergence of big and dirty data era demands newdistributed learning and inference solutions to tackle the problem of inference with corrupted data.Distributed inference networks (DINs) consist of a group of networked entities which acquireobservations regarding a phenomenon of interest (POI), collaborate with other entities in the networkby sharing their inference via different topologies to make a global inference. The centralgoal of this thesis is to analyze the effect of corrupted (or falsified) data on the inference performanceof DINs and design robust strategies to ensure reliable overall performance for severalpractical network architectures. Specifically, the inference (or learning) process can be that of detectionor estimation or classification, and the topology of the system can be parallel, hierarchicalor fully decentralized (peer to peer).Note that, the corrupted data model may seem similar to the scenario where local decisionsare transmitted over a Binary Symmetric Channel (BSC) with a certain cross over probability,however, there are fundamental differences. Over the last three decades, research communityhas extensively studied the impact of transmission channels or faults on the distributed detectionsystem and related problems due to its importance in several applications. However, corrupted(Byzantine) data models considered in this thesis, are philosophically different from the BSC orthe faulty sensor cases. Byzantines are intentional and intelligent, therefore, they can optimizeover the data corruption parameters. Thus, in contrast to channel aware detection, both the FC andthe Byzantines can optimize their utility by choosing their actions based on the knowledge of theiropponent’s behavior. Study of these practically motivated scenarios in the presence of Byzantinesis of utmost importance, and is missing from the channel aware detection and fault tolerant detectionliterature. This thesis advances the distributed inference literature by providing fundamentallimits of distributed inference with Byzantine data and provides optimal counter-measures (usingthe insights provided by these fundamental limits) from a network designer’s perspective. Notethat, the analysis of problems related to strategical interaction between Byzantines and networkdesigned is very challenging (NP-hard is many cases). However, we show that by utilizing theproperties of the network architecture, efficient solutions can be obtained. Specifically, we foundthat several problems related to the design of optimal counter-measures in the inference contextare, in fact, special cases of these NP-hard problems which can be solved in polynomial time.First, we consider the problem of distributed Bayesian detection in the presence of data falsification(or Byzantine) attacks in the parallel topology. Byzantines considered in this thesis are thosenodes that are compromised and reprogrammed by an adversary to transmit false information toa centralized fusion center (FC) to degrade detection performance. We show that above a certainfraction of Byzantine attackers in the network, the detection scheme becomes completely incapable(or blind) of utilizing the sensor data for detection. When the fraction of Byzantines is notsufficient to blind the FC, we also provide closed form expressions for the optimal attacking strategiesfor the Byzantines that most degrade the detection performance. Optimal attacking strategiesin certain cases have the minimax property and, therefore, the knowledge of these strategies haspractical significance and can be used to implement a robust detector at the FC.In several practical situations, parallel topology cannot be implemented due to limiting factors,such as, the FC being outside the communication range of the nodes and limited energy budget ofthe nodes. In such scenarios, a multi-hop network is employed, where nodes are organized hierarchicallyinto multiple levels (tree networks). Next, we study the problem of distributed inferencein tree topologies in the presence of Byzantines under several practical scenarios. We analyticallycharacterize the effect of Byzantines on the inference performance of the system. We also look atthe possible counter-measures from the FC’s perspective to protect the network from these Byzantines.These counter-measures are of two kinds: Byzantine identification schemes and Byzantinetolerant schemes. Using learning based techniques, Byzantine identification schemes are designedthat learn the identity of Byzantines in the network and use this information to improve systemperformance. For scenarios where this is not possible, Byzantine tolerant schemes, which usegame theory and error-correcting codes, are developed that tolerate the effect of Byzantines whilemaintaining a reasonably good inference performance in the network.Going a step further, we also consider scenarios where a centralized FC is not available. Insuch scenarios, a solution is to employ detection approaches which are based on fully distributedconsensus algorithms, where all of the nodes exchange information only with their neighbors. Forsuch networks, we analytically characterize the negative effect of Byzantines on the steady-stateand transient detection performance of conventional consensus-based detection schemes. To avoidperformance deterioration, we propose a distributed weighted average consensus algorithm that isrobust to Byzantine attacks. Next, we exploit the statistical distribution of the nodes’ data to devisetechniques for mitigating the influence of data falsifying Byzantines on the distributed detectionsystem. Since some parameters of the statistical distribution of the nodes’ data might not be knowna priori, we propose learning based techniques to enable an adaptive design of the local fusion orupdate rules.The above considerations highlight the negative effect of the corrupted data on the inferenceperformance. However, it is possible for a system designer to utilize the corrupted data for network’sbenefit. Finally, we consider the problem of detecting a high dimensional signal based oncompressed measurements with secrecy guarantees. We consider a scenario where the networkoperates in the presence of an eavesdropper who wants to discover the state of the nature beingmonitored by the system. To keep the data secret from the eavesdropper, we propose to use cooperatingtrustworthy nodes that assist the FC by injecting corrupted data in the system to deceive theeavesdropper. We also design the system by determining the optimal values of parameters whichmaximize the detection performance at the FC while ensuring perfect secrecy at the eavesdropper.