$TITLE:
Capacity Analysis for Gaussian and Discrete Memoryless Interference Networks

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:


$ABSTRACT:
Interference is an important issue for wireless communication systems where multipleuncoordinated users try to access to a common medium. The problem is even morecrucial for next-generation cellular networks where frequency reuse becomes ever moreintense, leading to more closely placed co-channel cells. This thesis describes our attempt to understand the impact of interference on communication performance as well as optimal ways to handle interference. From the theoretical point of view, we examine how interference affects the fundamental performance limits, and provide insights on how interference should be treated for various channel models under different operatingconditions. From the practical design point of view, we provide solutions to improve thesystem performance under unknown interference using multiple independent receptionsof the same information.For the simple two-user Gaussian interference channel, we establish that the simpleFrequency Division Multiplexing (FDM) technique suffices to provide the optimal sum-rate within the largest computable subregion of the general achievable rate region for acertain interference range.For the two-user discrete memoryless interference channels, we characterize differentinterference regimes as well as the corresponding capacity results. They include one-sided weak interference and mixed interference conditions. The sum-rate capacities arederived in both cases. The conditions, capacity expressions, as well as the capacity achieving schemes are analogous to those of the Gaussian channel model. The studyalso leads to new outer bounds that can be used to resolve the capacities of several newdiscrete memoryless interference channels.A three-user interference up-link transmission model is introduced. By examining howinterference affects the behavior of the performance limits, we capture the differencesand similarities between the traditional two-user channel model and the channel modelwith more than two users. If the interference is very strong, the capacity region is justa simple extension of the two-user case. For the strong interference case, a line segmenton the boundary of the capacity region is attained. When there are links with weakinterference, the performance limits behave very differently from that of the two-usercase: there is no single case that is found of which treating interference as noise isoptimal. In particular, for a subclass of Gaussian channels with mixed interference, aboundary point of the capacity region is determined. For the Gaussian channel withweak interference, sum capacities are obtained under various channel coefficients andpower constraint conditions. The optimalities in all the cases are obtained by decodingpart of the interference.Finally, we investigate a topic that has practical ramifications in real communicationsystems. We consider in particular a diversity reception system where independentlycopies of low density parity check (LDPC) coded signals are received. Relying only onnon-coherent reception in a highly dynamic environment with unknown interference, soft-decision combining is achieved whose performance is shown to improve significantly over existing approaches that rely on hard decision combining.