$TITLE:
Understanding Disordered Systems Through Numerical Simulation and Algorithm Development

$DEPARTMENT:
Physics

$KEYWORDS:
Combinatorics, Ising Model, Minimal Spanning Tree, Percolation, Scaling, Shortest Path

$ABSTRACT:
Disordered systems arise in many physical contexts. Not all matter is uni-form, and impurities or heterogeneities can be modeled by fixed random disor-der. Numerous complex networks also possess fixed disorder, leading to appli-cations in transportation systems [1], telecommunications [2], social networks[3, 4], and epidemic modeling [5], to name a few.Due to their random nature and power law critical behavior, disorderedsystems are difficult to study analytically. Numerical simulation can helpovercome this hurdle by allowing for the rapid computation of system states.In order to get precise statistics and extrapolate to the thermodynamic limit,large systems must be studied over many realizations. Thus, innovative al-gorithm development is essential in order reduce memory or running timerequirements of simulations.This thesis presents a review of disordered systems, as well as a thoroughstudy of two particular systems through numerical simulation, algorithm de-velopment and optimization, and careful statistical analysis of scaling proper-ties.Chapter 1 provides a thorough overview of disordered systems, the his-tory of their study in the physics community, and the development of tech-niques used to study them. Topics of quenched disorder, phase transitions, therenormalization group, criticality, and scale invariance are discussed. Severalprominent models of disordered systems are also explained. Lastly, analysistechniques used in studying disordered systems are covered.In Chapter 2, minimal spanning trees on critical percolation clusters arestudied, motivated in part by an analytic perturbation expansion by Jacksonand Read [6] that I check against numerical calculations. This system has adirect mapping to the ground state of the strongly disordered spin glass [7].We compute the path length fractal dimension of these trees in dimensionsd = {2, 3, 4, 5} and find our results to be compatible with the analytic resultssuggested by Jackson and Read.In Chapter 3, the random bond Ising ferromagnet is studied, which is es-pecially useful since it serves as a prototype for more complicated disorderedsystems such as the random field Ising model and spin glasses. We investigatethe effect that changing boundary spins has on the locations of domain wallsin the interior of the random ferromagnet system. We provide an analyticproof that ground state domain walls in the two dimensional system are de-composable, and we map these domain walls to a shortest paths problem. Byimplementing a multiple-source shortest paths algorithm developed by PhilipKlein [8], we are able to efficiently probe domain wall locations for all possibleconfigurations of boundary spins. We consider lattices with uncorrelated dis-order, as well as disorder that is spatially correlated according to a power law.We present numerical results for the scaling exponent governing the probabil-ity that a domain wall can be induced that passes through a particular locationin the system’s interior, and we compare these results to previous results onthe directed polymer problem.