$TITLE:
Power-Aware Planning and Design for Next Generation Wireless Networks

$DEPARTMENT:
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

$KEYWORDS:
approximation algorithm, energy efficiency, polynomial time solutions, resource allocation, wireless network design

$ABSTRACT:
Mobile network operators have witnessed a transition from being voice dominated to video/data domination, which leads to a dramatic traffic growth over the past decade. With the 4G wireless communication systems being deployed in the world most recently, the fifth generation (5G) mobile and wireless communica- tion technologies are emerging into research fields. The fast growing data traffic volume and dramatic expansion of network infrastructures will inevitably trigger tremendous escalation of energy consumption in wireless networks, which will re- sult in the increase of greenhouse gas emission and pose ever increasing urgency on the environmental protection and sustainable network development. Thus, energy-efficiency is one of the most important rules that 5G network planning and design should follow.This dissertation presents power-aware planning and design for next generation wireless networks. We study network planning and design problems in both offline planning and online resource allocation. We propose approximation algo- rithms and effective heuristics for various network design scenarios, with different wireless network setups and different power saving optimization objectives. We aim to save power consumption on both base stations (BSs) and user equipments (UEs) by leveraging wireless relay placement, small cell deployment, device-to- device communications and base station consolidation.We first study a joint signal-aware relay station placement and power alloca- tion problem with consideration for multiple related physical constraints such as channel capacity, signal to noise ratio requirement of subscribers, relay power andnetwork topology in multihop wireless relay networks. We present approximation schemes which first find a minimum number of relay stations, using maximum transmit power, to cover all the subscribers meeting each SNR requirement, and then ensure communications between any subscriber and a base station by ad- justing the transmit power of each relay station. In order to save power on BS, we propose a practical solution and offer a new perspective on implementing green wireless networks by embracing small cell networks. Many existing works have proposed to schedule base station into sleep to save energy. However, in reality, it is very difficult to shut down and reboot BSs frequently due to nu- merous technical issues and performance requirements. Instead of putting BSs into sleep, we tactically reduce the coverage of each base station, and strategi- cally place microcells to offload the traffic transmitted to/from BSs to save total power consumption.In online resource allocation, we aim to save tranmit power of UEs by en- abling device-to-device (D2D) communications in OFDMA-based wireless net- works. Most existing works on D2D communications either targeted CDMA- based single-channel networks or aimed at maximizing network throughput. We formally define an optimization problem based on a practical link data rate model, whose objective is to minimize total power consumption while meeting user data rate requirements. We propose to solve it using a joint optimization approach by presenting two effective and efficient algorithms, which both jointly determine mode selection, channel allocation and power assignment.In the last part of this dissertation, we propose to leverage load migration and base station consolidation for green communications and consider a power- efficient network planning problem in virtualized cognitive radio networks with the objective of minimizing total power consumption while meeting traffic load demand of each Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO). First we present aMixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) to provide optimal solutions. Then we present a general optimization framework to guide algorithm design, which solves two subproblems, channel assignment and load allocation, in sequence. In addition, we present an effective heuristic algorithm that jointly solves the two subproblems.Numerical results are presented to confirm the theoretical analysis of our schemes, and to show strong performances of our solutions, compared to several baseline methods.