$TITLE:
The Effect of Multimedia Cases on Science Teaching Self-Efficacy Beliefs of Prospective Teachers in Kenya

$DEPARTMENT:
Science Teaching

$KEYWORDS:
Multimedia cases, Prospective teachers, Science pre-service teachers, Self-efficacy beliefs, sub-Sahara Africa, Teacher training

$ABSTRACT:
This study examined the effects of multimedia cases on science teaching self-efficacy beliefs of prospective teachers in Kenya using mixed methods in data collection and analysis. Collaborating with two teacher educators at Central University, I designed and implemented two multimedia case-based intervention lessons, one with prospective chemistry teachers and the other with prospective physics teachers. I determined the changes in self-efficacy beliefs using a pretest and posttest with the Science Teaching Efficacy Beliefs Instrument (STEBI) for N=41 participants. I also collected data using a worksheet during the intervention lesson. When the prospective teachers went for their field practice, I sampled eight of them for in depth interviews to determine what they drew on from the intervention lesson during their classroom teaching.I used Roth McDuffie’s et al. (2014) framing to categorize the comments that the prospective teachers made on the worksheet into the four lenses of teacher, students, task or power and participation. I used paired sample t-test to determine the changes in self-efficacy beliefs and then developed profiles of the prospective teachers from the in depth interviews.The results revealed that prospective teachers paid more attention to the actions of the teacher and paid less attention to students’ activities. Their attention to the task was predominantly about the cognitive level of the task and almost always focused on the errors they noted. The prospective teacher noticing using the power and participation lens was not clearly delineable from the teacher lens, because most instructional activities that led to more participation were teacher actions.Science teaching efficacy beliefs has two constructs: personal science teaching efficacy (PSTE) and science teaching outcome expectancy (STOE). The PSTE scores were very high at 4.46 out of five on the pretest, and 4.41 on posttest. There was a decrease in the mean scores, but the change was not significant. There was a statistically significant increase in STOE (M=1.78, SD=5.8 t(40)=2.802 p=0.008) and an overall increase in the self-efficacy beliefs. The teacher profiles showed that prospective teachers drew from specific examples from the multimedia cases as well as learned from a gestalt interpretation of the teaching and learning activities in the clips that were shown.From these results, I discuss how prospective science teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs are altered in the process of watching multimedia cases. Their beliefs about knowledge start to change from absolute ownership to shared and co-constructed knowledge in class, as seen in the decrease in the personal teaching outcome expectancy (PSTE) and an increase in noticing of students’ role in learning.