$TITLE:
THE RELATIONSHIP OF SPIRITUALITY AND DEPRESSION ON THE SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING OF JAMAICAN COLLEGE STUDENTS: A CROSS SECTIONAL STUDY OF TEACHER TRAINING INSTITUTIONS IN JAMAICA

$DEPARTMENT:
Counseling and Human Services

$KEYWORDS:
depression, mental health, spirituality, teacher training

$ABSTRACT:
Spiritual is an integral component of one’s well-being and can serve as a barrier to our wellness as well as a protective factor from ill health.  Spirituality helps one to make meaning of life’s circumstances and can be an intrinsic motivator helping to regain balance in our world.  This study examined the relationship between spirituality, depression, and subjective well-being in 214 students enrolled in teachers’ colleges in Jamaica.  Researchers (Campbell, Roberti, Maynard & Emmanuel, 2009; Kameel & Kamal, 2011; Lipps, Lowe & Gibbons, 2004; Lowe, Lipps & Young, 2009) have documented depression as an issue for college students in Jamaica; however, studies have not yet included students enrolled in teachers’ colleges.  Additionally, there is scant research on spirituality and well-being in the Caribbean. This current study tested the extent to which spirituality moderated the relationship between self-reported depression on subjective well-being while controlling for demographic variables like year in college, denomination, and age. The study also tested whether spirituality mediated the relationship between self-reported depression and subjective well-being. All data were collected with self-report measures at a single point in time from a sample of college students. The results of the study supported that there was a significant relationship between depression and spiritual well-being and, between depression and subjective well-being. High levels of depression were related to increase spirituality and depression was found to be significantly related to subjective well-being. The mediation hypothesis was partially supported and the moderation hypothesis was not supported in this study. This study has both practice implication for college counselors to intentionally address spirituality in counseling, and for administrators to include sessions on spiritual exploration and development in the teacher education curriculum.