$TITLE:
Trading Dynamics in a Fragmented Market

$DEPARTMENT:
Finance

$KEYWORDS:
algorithmic trading, Market fragmentation, market microstructure

$ABSTRACT:
In this dissertation, we study the effect of recent regulatory and technological changes on tradingdynamics. Advances in communication and computing technologies have made millisecondlatencies as the new trading standard and have resulted in a new era of automated trading. Theintroduction of Reg-NMS (Regulation National Market System, implemented in 2007) has setstrict rules for the access and removal of liquidity from the fragmented US equity market, defacto linking the trading activities across trading venues. These transformations have not onlychanged how equity markets function but also how market participants interact with the marketand among themselves.We begin this study by examining how the introduction of Reg-NMS has affected the tradingstrategies of fast, impatient traders. The implementation of Rule 611, which extends price priorityacross all the trading venues in the National Market System, forces them to monitor all tradingvenues in order to correctly asses the placement of their orders. We find evidence that becauseof their impatient nature, these traders react to all events that negatively affect the position oftheir orders, regardless of the venue of origin. This behavior results in an order flow that is madeup of a high volume of very short-lived limit orders, which is consistent with a previously studied,but not yet fully explained, phenomenon of fleeting liquidity.IIWe then investigate whether fast, impatient traders are able to leverage their speed advantageto turn market fragmentation in their favor. We find evidence that their ability to anticipate theorder flow of the other market participants, allows them to engage in a trading strategy thatrelies on the simultaneous submission of multiple orders across exchanges. Such strategy, calledOverbooking, aims at executing only one of these orders rather than all of them and uses theavailability of multiple exchanges to increase the probability of execution while limiting the riskof over execution thanks to their speed advantage.Overall, our findings show that a sub group of traders was not only able to adapt to a changingtrading environment but actually take advantage of it. The Overbooking trading strategy iseffective at increasing the probability of execution while also decreasing execution time and it isparticularly effective for stocks with a high degree of competition for superior queue placement.This suggests that the ability to effectively trade on multiple venues simultaneously allows fast,impatient traders to avoid engaging in a costly algorithmic battle for a favorable queueplacement, or submitting very aggressively priced limit orders, to attain quick execution.Moreover, our findings show that the actions of these traders, driven by their fast, and impatientnature and constrained by the complex rules that regulate liquidity access and provision on theNational Market System, result in the linking of order flow dynamics across trading venues. Wefind that the cancellation of an order can be determined by changes that have occurredelsewhere in the market and that to model correctly order flow dynamics it is necessary toinclude in the analysis the changes that occur on all trading venues. We also find that fast,impatient traders, actively monitor the state of all trading venues after order submission, andthat they benchmark the present state of the market to the state at submission.