$TITLE:
EXPERIMENTAL AND MODELING STUDY OF IGNITION-RESISTANT FUELS

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:


$ABSTRACT:
This research investigates relative ignition behavior of some oxygenated fuels and theirblends with gasoline surrogates. It seeks to identify fuels with higher resistance to ignitionand validate tentative kinetic models intended to predict their combustion chemistry. Italso develops a method for simplified ignition delay time correlation that can allow for amore rapid estimation of the ignition behavior of a given fuel at known thermodynamicconditions.The work is motivated by the fact that in spark-ignition (SI) engines, increasing energyconversion efficiency through increasing the engine compression ratio is limited by thephenomenon of undesired autoignition known as engine knock. This is controlled by thechemical kinetics of the fuels which can be modified toward higher resistance using fuels ofhigher ignition resistance. In this study, the ignition behavior of the representative fuels isstudied using both shock tube experiments and simulations of the kinetics of homogeneouschemical reactors. Specifically, we study: 1) propanol isomers, which are alcohols withthree carbon atoms and promising alternative fuels for gasoline fuels; 2) MTBE and ETBE,which are effective ignition-resistant fuel components; 3) blends of a gasoline with ETBE oriso-propanol, to establish the kinetic interactions. The resulting experimental data are usedto validate current chemical kinetics models of the individual fuels. To further facilitate the use of fuel blends suggested by this study, combined chemical kinetic models are developed of iso-octane as a gasoline surrogate and each of ignition resistant fuels identified.In order to reduce the computational cost of using the validated detailed models of thefuels studied, reduced kinetic models are developed. These reduced versions are of twokinds. The first uses the model reduction method known as Alternate Species Elimination(ASE) to derive smaller versions of the detailed models. The second reduction approachfocuses on the prediction of the chemical time scale associated with ignition. Here ageneralized ignition format is developed and detailed model simulations are used to obtainthe constraining data. This makes it possible to predict ignition time scales based onknowledge of temperature, pressure, and composition of the combustible mixture.The work advances understanding of biofuels combustion by characterizing ignitionproperties of promising fuel additives and the effects of fuel blend on ignition. Theresulting experimental data sets are useful for validating existing and future kinetic models.The combined models will allow for better insight into the combustion chemistry ofignition-resistant fuels formed from blending iso-octane with iso-propanol or ETBE.