$TITLE:
Coordination polymers of the alkaline earth metals for applications in synthesis and gas storage

$DEPARTMENT:
Chemistry

$KEYWORDS:


$ABSTRACT:
The work presented in this thesis outlines our efforts to synthesize alkaline earth metalcoordination complexes that could potentially serve as gas storage and synthetic precursormaterials. The properties of these complexes are heavily influenced by factors such as thepropensity to aggregate and the absence of energetically available d-orbitals which providedirectionality. These often pose a challenge in obtaining suitable, stable compounds.Some challenges in the crystallization of alkaline earth coordination complexes involvethe precipitation of insoluble aggregates. Thus, a great part of the work focused on studyingsuitable reaction conditions towards the formation of X-ray quality crystals for structuralelucidation. Slow concentration and hydro/solvothermal techniques, among others, were primecrystallization methods in this work.The bulk of this thesis is divided in two parts. The first part details our attempts tosynthesize metal organic frameworks (MOFs) of Mg, Ca, Sr and Ba. Our ligands of choice werethe p, m, o-pyridinecarboxylic acids which provide two different binding sites. These consist ofan N-donor and an anionic carboxylic acid, the N-donor located at different positions in thepyridyl ring depending on the isomer. These are also of low cost and soluble in different organicsolvents.The use of pyridinecarboxylic acids resulted in the systematic isolation of fivemagnesium coordination complexes, three of which exhibit open-framework character andremain stable after removal of guests, and two of which are hydrogen bonded networks. Further,systematic work with the heavier metals resulted in three fully 3-dimensional complexes basedon Ca, Sr and Ba and one hydrogen-bonded Ca complex. A pattern is observed when using thelinear p or angular m-pyridinecarboxylic acid in the presence of MeOH/DMF mixtures, in which3-dimensional motifs with open-framework (p) and dense (m) character (Mg, Ca and Sr) aredisplayed. The dimensionality decreases in the presence of water or strongly coordinatingdonors, leading to the formation of hydrogen bound or 2-dimensional complexes.The second part of this thesis involves the isolation of crown stabilized alkaline earthtosylates. The work resulted in the isolation of four new crown stabilized alkaline earth tosylates.Trends observed include an increase in coordination number as the size of the metal increases.Variation of crown:metal stoichiometry was also studied and resulted in two different calciumspecies displaying fully separated (1:1) and contact separated (1:2) ion association modes. For Srand Ba, (1:1) stoichiometries resulted in hydrogen bound contact species.This thesis provides a selection of alkaline earth metal coordination complexes. Thepreparation of these complexes has led to the elucidation of their synthetic routes. Fullcharacterization of the complexes is also provided.