$TITLE:
Structure, Dynamics and Rheology of Polymer Solutions from Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics: Effects of Polymer Concentration, Solvent Quality and Geometric Confinement

$DEPARTMENT:
Biomedical and Chemical Engineering

$KEYWORDS:


$ABSTRACT:
Understanding flow-microstructure interactions in macromolecular fluids is of greatimportance in the design and optimization of ubiquitous polymer processing operations.Further, such interactions are routinely encountered in separation of biopolymer mixturesusing gel electrophoresis and microfluidic technologies, manufacturing of polymer-basedfunctional nanocomposites and polymer-induced reduction in turbulent friction drag. Todate, the vast amount of theoretical/computational modeling efforts on flowmicrostructurecoupling has focused on continuum-level and stochastic descriptions.Such approaches, while useful in qualitatively predicting polymer dynamics and rheologyin model systems, are incapable of describing the effects of polymer-solvent, polymerpolymerand polymer-wall interactions. Further, in the context of polymer solutions, theincorporation of hydrodynamic interaction are often computationally challenging. Hence,the goal of this work has been to investigate the structure, dynamics and rheology ofsolutions of flexible linear polymers using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations inpresence of explicit solvent mediated interactions.Coarse-grained (CG) molecular models and corresponding force fields are employedto describe the polymer, solvent and the underlying physico-chemical interactions. TheCG models are validated against atomistic ones by comparing the predictions of certainstructure parameters such as persistence length, radius of gyration and radial distributionfunctions of the monomeric units. Results are first presented for the dynamics of a singlepolymer chain in shear flow. The effects of chain length and shear rate on theconfiguration statistics, e.g. tumbling frequency and orientation distribution of the end-toendvector, are presented and compared to experimental observations as well aspredictions of mesoscopic stochastic dynamic theories. Further, the effects of solventpolymerinteractions on the configuration dynamics of a single polymer chain undergood, theta and poor solvent conditions are discussed. Specifically, the role of solventquality is shown to have a pronounced effect on coil-stretch transition in shear flow. Wealso show that in addition to tumbling dynamics, polymer chain may undergoconfigurational changes through a novel mechanism, namely collapse dynamics. CGMDpredictions for the relationship between the zero-shear viscosity and polymerconcentration in dilute and semi-dilute regimes are presented and compared toexperiment results. Shear thinning behavior is observed in both dilute and semidilutesolutions in non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations. Possible approaches toparameterizing phenomenological constitutive models using MD simulation data isexplored. Subsequently, influence of solvent quality on the rheological properties ofdilute and semidilute solutions is discussed. Finally, the effect of geometric confinementon equilibrium configurations as well as shear-induced migration of the polymer chains isdescribed.