$TITLE:
Ethnography of the City: Creativity, Sustainability, and Social Justice in Seattle, Washington

$DEPARTMENT:
Geography

$KEYWORDS:
reativity, Ethnography, Narrative, Performativity, Social Justice, Sustainability

$ABSTRACT:
This ethnography of the city analyzes institutional narratives of  creativity, sustainability, and social justice in Seattle, Washington. Through  an in-depth examination of the iterative processes of naming and enacting place,  I argue that institutional narratives of place in Seattle at once accentuate the  politically progressive ideals of city government and disguise exclusions in the  city. In other words, Seattle city government strives to actualize progressive  objectives through narratives of place. Yet, the process of performing place  along such themes also reproduces and extends racialized and classed  inequities.I advance this argument through a sustained engagement with narratives  of creativity, sustainability, and social justice circulating within Seattle  municipal government and implemented throughout the urban landscape.  Specifically, I contend that designing economic development plans based on the  creative class template put forth by Richard Florida (2002a) commodifies  diversity, compels gentrification, and overlooks place particularities. I then  examine how presumptions of choice underpin sustainability efforts in Seattle  and, therefore, diminish the extent of programmatic impact and secure  sustainability within class, and often racialized, privilege. I draw upon scale  to reveal that while the Race and Social Justice Initiative catalyzes  transformation at the individual and micro-scales, this very transformation  contributes to widespread consent for the overarching power structure of city  government at the broader scale, thus enabling neoliberal entrepreneurialism to  continue shaping the city. Throughout this ethnography, I resist the temptation  to reify the city and instead delve into the contradictions, paradoxes, and  tangled threads of three narratives of place. My analysis, therefore, emphasizes  the performative and constitutive processes of the city.Moving beyond idealized portrayals of place requires involvement with  more than just the `official' story. Thus, I mobilize a research design -  comprised of participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and archival  research - that enables me to identify and understand the confluence of  processes that coalesce into institutional narratives of place and to analyze  the ramifications of these narratives. Ethnographic research conducted in 2009  in Seattle city government, King County government, local organizations and  not-for-profits, and neighborhood contexts provides the foundation and impetus  for this research.Ethnography offers a useful way to both gather data and consider varied  aspects of institutional narratives of place. For instance, institutional  narratives convey knowledge and assumptions of place. They also help produce  knowledge and assumptions about place. Ethnography provides an avenue for  directly encountering this relationship of producing and being produced, for  sorting through contradictions, and for complicating quick appraisals of place.  Accordingly, the heterogeneity of the city persistently comes to the  fore.Highlighting institutional narratives of sustainability, creativity,  and social justice through ethnography represents a novel way of prying open and  unpacking the urban within and beyond Seattle. The questions I raise about the  messiness of governance, inclusion and exclusion, and the meaning and performing  of the city matter in Seattle and pertain to other urban settings. Locating this  ethnography within a city that enjoys esteem in the geographic imagination as a  forerunner of progressive social change sheds light on the particularities of  Seattle. This ethnography of the city also elucidates more generally the many  challenges bound up with efforts to revitalize neighborhoods, achieve  environmental, social, and economic sustainability, and create inclusive and  socially just urban spaces.