$TITLE:
The View From Ecuador: Security, Insecurity, and Chaotic Geographies of U.S. Migrant Detention and Deportation

$DEPARTMENT:
Geography

$KEYWORDS:
Deportation, Detention, Ecuador, Immigration, Security

$ABSTRACT:
The central argument of this dissertation is that while the  immigration enforcement policies of detention and deportation are politically  positioned as critical strategies for protecting U.S. homeland security, these  policies actually create insecurity at multiple scales. The project, grounded in  both critical geopolitics and feminist political geography, endeavors to  interrogate the "master narratives" behind these restrictive policies. First,  the dissertation explores the historical, political, and cultural factors behind  the United States' increased use of detention and deportation, as well as the  deep-seated structural factors driving Ecuadorian migration to the United  States. Then, drawing on ethnographic fieldwork in Ecuador with deportees and  family members of detained migrants, the study seeks to understand ways in which  these policies are embodied both within and outside U.S. borders. It is  suggested that the detention and deportation system engenders chaos - or the  appearance of chaos - in numerous spaces and for various groups of individuals.  Three "chaotic geographies" of the system are explored in order to scrutinize  the enactment of immigration policy: the operation of the system itself,  detainees' experiences, and reverberations of detention and deportation in  Ecuador. Data show that inside U.S. borders, these enforcement policies interact  recursively with processes of racialization and criminalization to generate  insecurity for detained migrants and discipline employees to behave in  particular ways. In addition, due to its inherent disorder and confusion, the  detention and deportation system projects a cloak of impenetrability that hides  the powerful actors behind its expansion, faults, and abuses. The dissertation  then investigates how the chaos of detention and deportation extends  transnationally to countries of migrant origin to produce insecurity precisely  at the scale of the home for migrants' families, communities, and for returned  migrants. In Ecuador, detention and deportation increase economic and  ontological insecurity for family members and returned migrants in ways that  spread throughout communities. Moreover, data from Ecuador illustrate that  policymakers' objectives of deterrence do not play out as anticipated. In this  project, the author joins critical scholars in calling for an expanded  understanding of the concept of security, one which incorporates multiple scales  and operates across political borders.