$TITLE:
Victory's Foundation: US Logistical Support of the Allied Mediterranean Campaign, 1942-1945

$DEPARTMENT:
History

$KEYWORDS:
Logistics, Mediterranean, Second World War, Services of Supply, US Army, World War II

$ABSTRACT:
From November 1942 until May 1945, the Allied nations fought a  series of campaigns across the Mediterranean. Ever since, historians have  debated the role and impact of the Mediterranean theater upon the greater war in  Europe. Through analysis of official archival documents, unit histories from the  period, and personal memoirs, this dissertation investigates the impact of US  Army service forces on each of the campaigns and operations conducted across the  Mediterranean theater. Additionally, this study examines how the campaigns of  the Mediterranean shaped and informed the 1944 landings in France and the  subsequent drive into Germany. This dissertation argues that the Normandy  invasion of 1944 and victory over Germany did not just happen. The success that  the Allied forces enjoyed in France and Germany had its foundation set in the  learning and experiences of the Mediterranean that began in November 1942.  Additionally, the Allies (particularly the US) would not have achieved victory  as quickly as they did if it were not for the development of the administrative  and logistical systems, organizations, equipment, and doctrine that occurred  within the Mediterranean. Simply put, the Mediterranean was an essential Petri  dish that allowed US service units to test new concepts and develop the  experience necessary to win the war against Germany. This was the laboratory in  which the US military, particularly the support units, could learn and adapt  with minimal risk. Considering the alternatives, the Allied strategy of  conducting operations in the Mediterranean and then shifting the priority to the  European theater proved the approach that produced the shortest end to the war.  This indirect approach provided the time to train a conscript army and modernize  the military. Most importantly, the US Army learned how to support ground and  air forces deployed in an overseas theater.