$TITLE:
The study of high school teachers' utilization of instructional media in Aceh Province, Indonesia

$DEPARTMENT:
Instructional Design, Development and Evaluation

$KEYWORDS:
Secondary education, Indonesia, Educational technology

$ABSTRACT:
Adoption and implementation of educational technology in Indonesia, to some extent, is influenced by a number of factors considered as constraints. This study was conducted in one of the country's provinces, Aceh Province, to determine the extent to which educational technology is utilized by high school teachers.The findings suggest that most of the respondents were FKIP or IKIP (Indonesian high school teachers education and training institutions) graduates, holding certificates or diplomas required at the high school level, and having taught for more than three years. Overall, media were reportedly not available or not accessible in the schools. Most of the media reported to be available by the teachers were traditional or simple media, namely chalkboards, photographs or pictures, maps or globes, lab kits, charts, posters, flannel boards, textbooks or readings, newspapers, magazines, and simulation games. Among 24 nonprint media and 7 print media listed in the questionnaire, only six media were frequently used by most of the high school teachers, namely chalkboards, photographs or pictures, charts, textbooks and reading materials, newspapers, and magazines. Interactive video or videodiscs were reportedly never used.The most prevalent reasons for utilizing media were reported to be availability in the schools, easy to obtain when needed, effective in achieving teaching objectives, and simple and easy to use. The most prevalent reasons for not utilizing media were reported to be unavailability of media and equipment, lack of supporting facilities and materials, and not enough time to prepare for the use of media. Lack of incentives, available media and equipment were out of order or not compatible with one another, and lack of understanding on the part of superiors were also reported to be reasons for non-use of media by the teachers. The most preferred types of media as reported by the high school teachers were textbooks and reading materials, chalkboards, transparencies, videotapes or videocassettes, lab kits, magazines, newspapers and computer programs. (Abstract shortened with permission of author.)