$TITLE:
Factors that Influence Users to Keep and Leave Information Items: A Case Study of College Students' Personal Information Management Behavior

$DEPARTMENT:
Information Science and Technology

$KEYWORDS:
Personal information management, Information organization, Digital clutter

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation  research investigates personal information management (PIM),  specifically keeping and leaving behavior, in the context of information  being accessible 24/7 from the Web and users being constantly connected  via wireless devices.A multiple-embedded  case study investigates student PIM behavior within the context of a  large project, a college course. The theoretical framework introduces  the hoarding literature, and associated affective factors, into the PIM  domain to conceptualize users' keeping and leaving behavior. Multiple  sources of evidence for the three courses and sixteen student cases were  collected - interviews, students' physical artifacts, direct  observation, and course documents. Data reduction and analysis  techniques included matrices, thematic coding, and metaphor analysis.Two  recurring factors across the keeping and leaving phenomena were the  complexity of the work and the form of the material (digital or paper).  The work complexity and form influenced acquisition, non-acquisition,  discard, and retention behavior. Paper affordances were a major factor  in students' acquisition of items. Positive and negative affect  influenced retention and discard, respectively. Acquisition factors were  mostly unique, while non-acquisition, retention, and discard shared  twelve factors. These factors are presented within a refined conceptual  framework to provide the basis for future studies and instrument  development.The multiple case study  design enabled the identification of course contextual factors that  influence acquisition and retention. The type of content, type of  assessment, in-class experience, out-of-class communication, and level  of the student all influenced students' keeping and leaving behavior.  This finding demonstrates the importance of including context when  studying PIM behavior.This study  contributes methodologically to the PIM and user behavior fields,  conceptually to the PIM and hoarding literatures, and practically to  college students, instructors, and higher education institutions. Future  research in the field of PIM, specifically related to "digital  clutter", and on technology issues around learning for college students  are proposed.