$TITLE:
Evaluation of factors promoting successful microcomputing implementation in the Nigerian workplace

$DEPARTMENT:
Information Science and Technology

$KEYWORDS:
microcomputing implementation

$ABSTRACT:
What contributes to successful implementation of microcomputing in Nigeria? A model was proposed that analyzed the relative contributions of technological, contextual and implementation process validities to implementation success. Three independent variables were hypothesized as contributing to successful implementation with implementation process validity explaining most of the variance. Technological validity was conceptualized as social and technology features. Contextual validity describes the environmental and organizational characteristics. Implementation process validity represents the actual strategies surrounding implementation. Implementation success, which is the dependent variable, is denoted by (1) use of the system, (2) impacts of the system on the users' job performance, and (3) users' satisfaction with the system.To test the model, data was gathered from 108 public and private Nigerian organizations that use microcomputing systems in carrying out easily rationalizable tasks. Two research questions were addressed: (1) What are the relationships among technological, contextual, and implementation process factors and implementation success? (2) What contribution does implementation process validity make to the explanatory power of the set of independent variables? Two corresponding hypotheses were examined.The research plan consisted of a sample survey which emphasizes statistical inference and personal interviews which emphasized qualitative data. Contextual variables emerged as the most likely to predict success, followed by technological variables. Implementation process variables were left almost out of account. Thus, hypothesis one was partially supported while hypothesis two was rejected outright. Some of the concerns and insights relating to achieving successful implementation were expressed by users during the interviews. They seemed to corroborate the findings that successful implementation is promoted primarily by organizational policies, decisions, structure and resources rather than by technology and strategies to support the IS functions.As the history of information systems is one of difficulty with implementation, this study can be useful. From a managerial and policy standpoint, it may provide information systems managers and professionals, particularly in developing nations, guidelines and informed approaches to implementing their information technologies.