$TITLE:
Information Behaviors in Higher Education Research Administration: Support for Collaborative Proposal Development Activities

$DEPARTMENT:
Information Management and Technology

$KEYWORDS:
higher education, information behaviors, proposal development, research administration, user-based

$ABSTRACT:
Proposal development is a very complex  process. While the  existing river of instructional materials for  proposal development runs wide,  the body of empirical research  regarding this topic is narrow, especially  concerning information  behaviors surrounding the process. This study responds to  this need as  an empirical examination of a user-based method for improving our   understanding of proposal development information behaviors. A hybrid  concept of  problem/situation is adopted for the purpose of  characterizing proposal  development as a problem situated in time and  space, with institutions of higher  education (IHEs) faculty as the  users or population of interest for this study.  This study asserts that  an awareness of the information behaviors among faculty  - as tied to  their situational positioning and cognitive movements through that   situation - can be developed to inform the design, development and  facilitation  of collaborative activities surrounding proposal  development. Data for this  study were collected through in-depth  interviews with twenty-seven (27) faculty  members from eleven (11)  departments at four (4) schools and colleges of a  single  research-intensive university. Data analysis led to the development of a   new dynamic, iterative model of faculty cognitive behaviors during  proposal  development - the primary contribution of this study.  Additionally, this study  presents questions faculty members had and  constraints they perceived in  relation to their situational positioning  during development of a proposal.  Finally, this study discusses the  applicability and potential benefits of  user-based investigations to  improve proposal development in higher education.  The design and  results of this study contribute to both information behaviors  research  and to discussions and investigations surrounding proposal development   within the field of research administration.