$TITLE:
The Good, the Bad, and the Persuasive: Enhancing Retention of Future Information Professionals through Attitude Inoculation

$DEPARTMENT:
Information Science and Technology

$KEYWORDS:
Inoculation Theory, IT occupational culture, IT workforce, Recruitment, Resistance to attitude change, Attitude change, Retention

$ABSTRACT:
In recent years,  schools that offer information technology (IT) related majors have  struggled with student retention. This issue has raised concerns within  academic and practitioner communities alike. Previous research  (Erickson, 2005; Fischman, 2007; Margolis & Fisher, 2002; Panko,  2008; Wilson, 2002) has shown that early exposure to occupational  features of the IT profession has an effect on the decision making  processes of future information professionals, with respect to whether  to remain or leave the IT field. This dissertation investigated the  impact of an intervention designed to affect attitudes of future  information professionals towards occupational features of the IT field.This  research drew upon the principles of Inoculation Theory (McGuire, 1964,  1970) which aspires to strengthen existing attitudes, beliefs, and  behaviors against change (Miller & Burgoon, 1973). Future  information professionals have attitudes about features of the IT  profession - attitudes which are changeable, by definition. Arguably, if  students have a positive attitude towards the information profession,  helping them maintain it would be beneficial - e.g., to retention. As  well, it could help to prevent them from being convinced otherwise by  the various challenges they face or learn about during their educational  process.Following the principles of  Inoculation Theory, inoculative and attack messages were developed and  tested to assess their impacts on participants' resistance to attitude  change towards occupational features of the IT field. N=214 participants  enrolled in IT-related and non-IT-related majors at universities within  the United States took part in a three-phase online 2x2x2 (major X  gender X treatment) factorial experiment that exposed them to either an  inoculative and an attack message (treatment group) or to an attack  message only (control group). Results showed that significant  differences arose among the different groups of students. Groups that  were inoculated presented a greater resistance to attitude change when  confronted by a "threat." As hypothesized, an observed decline in  attitude was smaller for participants in the treatment group;  participants in control groups were more affected by the attack than  participants who had received an inoculation treatment. In opposition to  hypothesized differences, the study did not detect significant  differences in attitudes based on gender and major.