$TITLE:
How to learn Vasyl' Stefanyk's legacy: Manual for a teacher

$DEPARTMENT:
Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics

$KEYWORDS:
Vasyl' Stefanyk, Literature instruction, Ukrainian text, Slavic literature, Language arts

$ABSTRACT:
This research project for the Doctor of Arts degree is the study of short prose written by Vasyl' Stefanyk--the leading Ukrainian novelist in the latter nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,--accompanied by a collection of authentic materials to enhance students' knowledge and suggestions for their utilization in the classroom. It is designed primarily as a source of useful background information and as a pedagogical guide for those teaching Ukrainian literature in high schools, Ukrainian Saturday schools in the Diaspora, secondary schools or gymnasiums which have Ukrainian programs in Poland and Ukraine, and in colleges with Ukrainian undergraduate programs of study.The project consists of five chapters. The first chapter provides the most essential biographical information about Vasyl' Stefanyk and general characteristics of the creative periods of his literary work. The second chapter consists of general discussion of falsification of the V. Stefanyk legacy by the Soviet critics. It arms the teacher with some important details to facilitate better understanding and analysis of the content of V. Stefanyk's novels. The second part of this chapter makes some comments on the first translations of his literary work into the Polish language. Chapter three is the most extensive. It contains suggestions and instructions for the interpretation of the three selected works of V. Stefanyk: "Ambition," "News" and "A Stone Cross." Special attention is paid to explain laconicism and psychology of his literary works. In addition to this, a dictionary of the dialect forms found in chosen novels and the literary approximation of these forms are given. Each entry is illustrated by short quotations from the selected novels. The fourth chapter builds a "literary montage" which is the compilation of critical evaluation and poetry about Vasyl' Stefanyk. This is done to provide a general review of the V. Stefanyk legacy. The fifth chapter summarizes the dialectal features of Pokuttia manifested in V. Stefanyk's novels and gives the instructions for their analysis and presentation in the classroom. This is essential for a general comprehension of V. Stefanyk's works.At the end of the project there is one appendix providing additional, uncommented authentic documents, including illustrations, as well as an extensive selected bibliography on the subject of the Vasyl' Stefanyk legacy.