$TITLE:
Ukrainian through Russian

$DEPARTMENT:
Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics

$KEYWORDS:
lexicon, russian language, ukrainian language

$ABSTRACT:
UKRAINIAN THROUGH RUSSIAN (henceforth UTR) is designed to teach Ukrainian at the university level to English-speaking students, who have a good background in Russian, preferably with an advanced Russian proficiency level (level 2 according to the guidelines of the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages). UTR may be best used by graduate students, strong fourth-year undergraduate Russian students, teachers of Slavic languages, native Russian speakers, those of Ukrainian descent, and all others interested in learning the Ukrainian language, who have a prior solid background in Russian and who speak English well.UTR follows a contrastive approach to selected phonetical, morphological, syntactical and lexical features, focusing primarily on the differences between Ukrainian and Russian. UTR may be covered in one semester in a course for graduate students, and in two semesters for fourth-year undergraduate students. Also, it may be used as a self-instructional course by native Russian speakers and by those with a high proficiency in Russian. It is recommended that UTR be used together with more elementary texts.UTR contains 13 lessons, which consist of texts; footnotes; vocabulary: conversational questions about each text: points on phonetics, grammar and lexicon; and exercises. At the beginning of UTR, both Ukrainian and Russian alphabets are given, followed by a glossary of Ukrainian linguistic terms translated into Russian and English. Next, Ukrainian letters and their respective sounds are presented and compared to their Russian counterparts. Texts in UTR have been carefully selected from authentic sources published in Ukraine to include concise information on Ukraine from the VIth century to the present. They were chosen so that students would not be merely learning the language, but also could develop a broader understanding of Ukraine and Ukrainians.In the 13 lessons there are over 2,000 words that are different from Russian. All entries are provided with key forms.All explanations in each lesson pertaining to phonetics, grammar and lexicon are given in English. Instructions for exercises are written in Ukrainian.At the end of UTR there is a selected bibliography of comparative surveys, Russian and Ukrainian language textbooks, and dictionaries.