$TITLE:
Mitigation of cross-contamination in an aircraft cabin through the use of localized exhaust

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Aircraft cabins, Local exhaust, Indoor air quality, Personal ventilation

$ABSTRACT:
This study investigates the use of localized exhaust placed in or near  the personal microenvironment (PµE) of seated occupants as a source  control strategy for contaminants contained in and carried by the human  thermal plume. Through the use of computational fluid dynamics (CFD),  various parameters were first studied to ascertain their influence on  the ability of the proposed local exhaust strategies to ingest  contaminants transported in the thermal plume. From this preliminary  work, it was found that the integration of the proposed designs in  individual office-type seating was challenging, owing to the inherent  limitations of suction-type flow, and that its use in high-density  row-type seating yielded much more favorable results. Accordingly, a CFD  study was subsequently conducted which incorporated the use of the  proposed local exhaust systems in a coach-class aircraft cabin. Using a  typical cabin ventilation scheme with appropriate flow rates, reductions  in passenger cross-contamination upwards of 60% were witnessed. To  further validate the concept, a mockup of a business-class aircraft  cabin was constructed which incorporated the proposed local exhaust  designs and tracer gas testing was conducted to quantify passenger  exposure reductions to cross-contamination. Depending on the local  exhaust system employed and the particular flow rates used, exposure  reductions of up to 90% were realized in the experimental testing. It  was also determined that the inclusion of privacy shells around the  seats greatly reduces the mixing of passenger-emitted contaminants and  can significantly improve the local exhaust system's ability to ingest  contaminants. Finally, a CFD validation study was conducted which  compared the collected experimental data with the results of the  validation case. It was found that CFD has difficulty resolving cases in  which a very large gradient in contaminant concentration exists near  the inlet to the local exhaust, e.g. where a point-source is located  very close to the exhaust orifice. Conversely, as the distance between  the point source and local exhaust increases, the concentration gradient  at the orifice decreases and the CFD results agree much better with the  experimental data. These findings agree with the conclusions of other  CFD researchers and yield much opportunity for future study and  enhancement of the CFD techniques used to model contaminant transport in  the indoor environment.