$TITLE:
Interface problems in vascular mechanics and the mechanics of layered systems

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Layered composites, Vascular mechanics, Atherosclerotic plaques

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation  investigates two novel interface problems arising in vascular mechanics  and the mechanics of layered composite systems. In each of these  problems, the interface is given distinct constitutive characterization  in the form of nonlinear interface force-displacement jump relations  which allows for phenomena such as interfacial debonding/decohesion,  interface rupture and defect evolution to occur naturally without the  addition of artificial "failure" criteria. This approach is applied to  an investigation of a mechanism of atherosclerotic plaque rupture and,  an exact, general analysis of debonding, decohesion and defect  propagation and interaction in layered composite systems.On the rupture of atherosclerotic plaques, a mechanism is proposed whereby   rupture at low nominal loads occurs by brittle decohesion of the  calcification/plaque cap interface followed by tearing of cap tissue.  This mechanism is explored in model analyses in which an elastic matrix (the  plaque cap  ), of either half space or layer geometry, contains an embedded rigid spherical inclusion (the  calcified cell  ) that interacts with it through a nonlinear structural interface which mediates attachment by  integrin receptor proteins.  Equilibrium solutions to boundary value problems, accounting for rigid  inclusion translation, are obtained from interfacial equations derived  from the Boussinesq potentials for spherical domains. The solution  indicates an abrupt/brittle character to the decohesion process similar  to snap buckling of curved beams and shells. The size of the domain  between the inclusion center and the free surface serves to determine  the concentration of stress in that region. For a calcification close to  the cap-luminal blood surface the abrupt unloading of the interface  during brittle decohesion produces a spike in circumferential stress  that, when exceeding the cap membrane strength, may precipitate cap  tearing followed by the release of the thrombogenic necrotic core to the  blood stream resulting in clotting and subsequent Acute Myocardial  Infarction.For the mechanics of layered  composites, a general theory and computational tool is developed for  systems consisting of an arbitrary number of linear elastic layers  separated by distinct nonlinear decohesive interfaces and subject to  general loads. Detailed features of debonding, along uniform and  nonuniform (defective) straight interfaces, are analyzed by solving the  governing interfacial integral equations obtained from the exact  solution for a single linear elastic slab subject to arbitrary loading  on its surfaces. The methodology allows for the investigation of both  solitary defect as well as multiple defect interaction problems. The  theory is applied in an analysis of a bilayer system, having a solitary  defect or a defect pair, under both peeling and mixed mode loading  configurations. An analysis of a trilayer system under uniform external  loading is also carried out which reveals the complexity of interfacial  separation phenomena. The theory is also applied to an analysis of a  crack-like defect with the results compared to the classical static  singular crack tip field.