$TITLE:
Development of a Novel Methodology for the Identification of VOC Emission Sources in Indoor Environments based on the Material Emission Signatures and Air Samples measured by PTR-MS

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Material emission signature, PTR-MS, Signal processing, Source identification, VOC

$ABSTRACT:
One of the recent important challenges in the research field of  indoor air quality is the identification of indoor Volatile Organic Compound  (VOC) emission sources to clearly pinpoint the sources of concern in a field  condition. This study represents the first attempt in developing a new technique  to find the sources that may be invisible or hidden based on the inspection even  of experts when a building with problems of indoor air quality is suspected. The  objectives of this study were 1) to determine VOC emission signatures specific  to nine typical building materials by using an on-line analytical monitoring  device, Proton Transfer Reaction - Mass Spectrometry (PTR-MS), 2) to explore the  correlation between the PTR-MS measurements and the measurements of  acceptability by human subjects, 3) to develop and evaluate a methodology to  identify individual sources of VOC emissions based on the measurements of mixed  air samples and the PTR-MS material emission signatures, 4) to determine the  long-term variation of VOC emission signatures over time, and 5) to develop a  method to account for the long-term variation of emission signatures in the  application of the emission source identification method. Samples of nine  building materials were tested individually and in combination, including  carpet, ceiling material, gypsum board, linoleum, two paints, polyolefine, PVC  and wood. VOC emissions from each material were measured in a 50-liter  small-scale chamber. Chamber air was sampled by PTR-MS to establish a database  of emission signatures unique to each individual material. Sorbent tube sampling  and TD-GC/MS analysis were also performed to identify the major VOCs emitted and  to compare the resulting data with the PTR-MS emission signatures. The data on  the acceptability of air quality assessed by human subjects were obtained from a  previous experimental study in which the emissions from the same batch of  materials were determined under the same area-specific ventilation rates as in  the case of the current measurements with PTR-MS. The same task was performed to  measure combined emissions from material mixtures for the application and  validation of a signal separation methodology and its source identification  enhancement by the consideration of long-term emissions. The methodology was  developed based on signal processing principles by employing the method of  multiple regression least squares (MRLS) and a normalization technique. Source  models were employed to track the change of individual material emission  signatures by PTR-MS over a long period of time. It is concluded that: 1) PTR-MS  can be an effective tool for establishing VOC emission signatures of material  types, and there were sufficient correlations (i.e. Correlation coefficient r  < -0.92 ) between the PTR-MS measurements and the acceptability of air  quality for the nine materials tested when the sum of selected major individual  VOC odor indices was used to represent the emission level measured by PTR-MS; 2)  the proposed method for source identification could identify the individual  sources at high success rates under laboratory conditions with two, three, five  and seven materials present; and 3) the long-term (over nine months) variation  of emission factors of the tested materials could be well represented by an  empirical power-law model or a mechanistic diffusion based model, and the model  coefficients could be estimated based on relatively a short-term set of emission  measurements (i.e. within 28 days). The source models could also be used to  predict the variation of material emission signatures, which could in turn be  used for source identification. Further experiments and investigation are needed  to apply the presented source identification method under real field conditions.