$TITLE:
Physical adsorption, chemisorption and catalytic oxidization for indoor VOCs removal

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Volatile organic compounds, Adsorption, Catalytic oxidization, Chemisorption, Formaldehyde, Indoor air quality

$ABSTRACT:
Adsorption and  catalytic oxidation are two promising technologies for indoor volatile  organic compounds (VOCs) removal. Combining experimental and modeling  approach, the present study aimed at improving the understanding and  modeling of adsorption of water-insoluble VOCs (e.g. toluene), and  chemisorption and catalytic oxidization of water soluble VOCs (e.g.  formaldehyde).For water-insoluble  compounds, a dynamic volumetric method was developed for determination  of VOC adsorption isotherm of active carbon at low concentration levels.  Diffusion coefficient, partition coefficient and mass transfer  coefficient of toluene in activated carbon were obtained by comparing  numerical modeling results with the adsorption test data. Two  mechanistic models were developed for VOCs removal by activated carbon  filter bed. Both models fitted well with experimental data. Based on the  combined analysis of the experimental and numerical results, external  mass transfer and surface diffusion were found to be the controlling  mechanisms in VOC adsorption by activated carbon.For  water soluble compounds, research was conducted to evaluate the  performance of selected chemisorbents and catalysts for formaldehyde  removal at room temperature. The effects of concentration, relative  humidity, velocity and co-existence of multi-VOCs on the removal  performance were experimentally investigated. The effect of relative  humidity was related to the micropore structure, properties of  sorbent/catalyst materials and the chemical reaction mechanisms. Study  of the effect of velocity through the media bed revealed the role of  external mass transfer for different materials. Supported noble metal  catalyst was found to have the most lasting activity and capacity for  formaldehyde removal at typical indoor environmental conditions. Two  mechanistic models were developed for filter bed employing  chemisorption/catalytic oxidation methods. The models were able to  predict the experimental data well. Future researches are needed in  terms of byproduct generation, field performance evaluation, more  cost-effective chemisorbent and catalyst materials, and easy to use  design/optimization tool.