$TITLE:
Dynamic Botanical Filtration System for Indoor Air Purification

$DEPARTMENT:
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

$KEYWORDS:
Dynamic Botanical Air Filtration, DBAF, Air Purification

$ABSTRACT:
A dynamic botanical air filtration (DBAF) system was developed,  tested and modeled for indoor air purification. The DBAF system consisted of an  activated-carbon/hydroculture-based root bed for potted-plant, a fan for driving  air through the root bed for purification, and an irrigation system for  maintaining proper moisture content in the root bed. Results from test conducted  in a full-scale open office space indicated that the filtration system had  ability to supply clean air equivalent to 80% of required outdoor air supply for  the space. The DBAF was effective for removing both formaldehyde and toluene at  5 to 32% volumetric water content of the root bed. It also performed  consistently well over the relatively long testing period of 300 days while  running continuously.In order to improve the understanding of the mechanisms of the  DBAF system in removing the volatile organic compounds, a series of further  experiments were conducted to determine the important factors affecting the  removal performance, and the roles of different transport, storage and removal  processes. It was found that passing the air through the root bed with microbes  was essential to obtain meaningful removal efficiency. Moisture in the root bed  also played an important role, both for maintaining a favorable living condition  for microbes and for absorbing water-soluble compounds such as formaldehyde. The  role of the plant was to introduce and maintain a favorable microbe community  that effectively degraded the VOCs that were adsorbed or absorbed by the root  bed. While the moisture in a wet bed had the scrubber effect for water-soluble  compounds such as formaldehyde, presence of the plant increased the removal  efficiency by about a factor of two based on the results from the reduced-scale  root bed experiments.A mathematical model was also developed for predicting the short  and long term performance of the DBAF with model parameters estimated from the  experiments. The simulation results showed that the model could describe the  pressure drop and airflow relationship well by using the air permeability as a  model parameter. The water source added in the model also lead to the similar  bed moisture content and outlet air RH as that in real test case. The simulation  results also showed that the developed model worked well in analyzing the effect  of different parameters. It was also found that the critical bio-degradation  rate constant was 1×10-5 s 1, below which the DBAF would not be able to sustain  the formaldehyde removal performance. The bio-degradation rate constant of the  reduced scale DBAF tested was estimated to be in the range of 0.8-1.5×10-4 s  1.Whole building energy simulation results showed that using the  DBAF to substitute 80% of the outdoor air supply without adversely affecting the  indoor air quality could result in 30% saving in heating, 3% in cooling and 0.7%  in pump energy consumption per year at the climate of Syracuse, NY (Zone 5). A  higher percentage of energy savings was found to be achievable for climate zones  with a higher annual heating load (e.g., climate zone 6 and 7).