$TITLE:
Fibromyalgia Syndrome: The Relationship between Alexithymia and Attachment Style on Couple Relationship

$DEPARTMENT:
Marriage and Family Therapy

$KEYWORDS:
Fibromyalgia syndrome, FMS, Couple satisfaction, Couple Relationship

$ABSTRACT:
The fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is the most frequent cause of  chronic, widespread pain in North America and Europe. It is a non-inflammatory  musculoskeletal syndrome predominantly found in the female middle-aged  population with a ratio men/women of ¼. Considered for decades an `imaginary' or  at best a psychosomatic disease, fibromyalgia gained its status as a diagnosable  entity in the early 90s giving a `voice' to the invisible suffering of people,  the majority of them being women afflicted by it. While in general the research  on psychosocial aspects of fibromyalgia is scarce, couple and family aspects are  even less studied than individual aspects. In an attempt to shed more light on  the quality of couple relationship of people suffering from FMS, this study  looked at the mediation effect of alexithymia and attachment style on the  relationship between the impact of fibromyalgia and couple satisfaction. This is  a quantitative study that employed a Structural Equation Modeling statistical  analysis. The findings from this study show that neither alexithymia nor a  specific attachment style is a mediator of the relationship between fibromyalgia  impact and couple satisfaction. The study also shows that fibromyalgia symptoms  do not have a statistically significant impact on couple adjustment. A  combination of the presence of alexithymia traits and an avoidant attachment  style seems to have the most powerful impact on couple satisfaction in the  population suffering from fibromyalgia. Several clinical implications are  highlighted as a result of this study: couple therapists working with clients  with fibromyalgia should familiarize themselves with the symptoms of this  syndrome and how they affect the everyday life of the partners, as well as the  impact of the alexithymia traits and an insecure attachment style on the couple  relationship in this population. Due to its emphasis on emotional experiences  and its psychoeducational aspects in regards to processing feelings,  Emotionally-Focused Therapy is proposed to be very well suited in working with  fibromyalgia sufferers and their partners, especially those with alexithymia  features and insecure attachment styles.