$TITLE:
A Realist Metaphysics of Race: A Context-Sensitive,Short-Term Retentionist, Long-Term Revisionist Approach

$DEPARTMENT:
Philosophy

$KEYWORDS:
Eliminativism, Natural kinds, Race, Realism, Social construction, Social philosophy

$ABSTRACT:
There are three main metaphysical positions on race. Anti-realists deny  that there are races. Natural-kind positions find sub-groups of   homo sapiens  with scientific importance and call them races. Social-kind views  consider races to exist because of contingent social practices. I argue  for a view closest to the third camp. Chapter 1 makes room for racial  natural kinds, provided a minimal-enough sense of a natural kind.  However, the groups we arrive at by nonarbitrary scientific means are  not the socially-important groups that we ordinarily call races. Thus  the groups we normally call races are not natural kinds. Chapter 2  argues that anti-realist arguments fail by relying on experts rather  than ordinary language-users, using historical rather than contemporary  data, and making unjustified conclusions from thought experiments and  ordinary use. Chapter 3 makes room for a social-kind view, showing (1)  the contingency of the categories, (2) the fact that arbitrary  socially-determined facts determine the structure of racial  classification (3) the instability of racial categories. Racial groups  would exist without social constructions, since they are just groups of  people, but the social constructions make particular group  classifications socially important and allow us to name them as races.  Chapter 4 argues for context-sensitivity in racial constructions, with  fluidity from one context to another even for the same person. Different  factors might be relevant in different settings to change which racial  labels might apply. Chapter 5 argues that we should use racial  categories to identify problems in how our racial construction is  formed, including harmful effects, rather than seeking to eliminate the  categories in any direct way, but we should also make efforts to change  the conditions that generate those problematic elements, so we can  retain only the unproblematic aspects. Some elements of racial  identity-formation can be good.