$TITLE:
Characterization of Enhanced Interferometric Gravitational Wave Detectors and Studies of Numeric Simulations for Compact-Binary Coalescences

$DEPARTMENT:
Physics

$KEYWORDS:
Black holes, Gravitational waves, LIGO, Numerical relativity

$ABSTRACT:
Gravitational waves are a consequence of the general theory of  relativity. Direct detection of such waves will provide a wealth of information  about physics, astronomy, and cosmology. A worldwide effort is currently  underway to make the first direct detection of gravitational waves. The global  network of detectors includes the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave  Observatory (LIGO), which recently completed its sixth science run.A particularly promising source of gravitational waves is a  binary system consisting of two neutron stars and/or black holes. As the objects  orbit each other they emit gravitational radiation, lose energy, and spiral  inwards. This produces a characteristic ``chirp'' signal for which we can search  in the LIGO data. Currently this is done using matched-filter techniques, which  correlate the detector data against analytic models of the emitted gravitational  waves. Several choices must be made in constructing a search for signals from  such binary coalescences.Any discrepancy between the signals and the models used will  reduce the effectiveness of the matched filter. However, the analytic models are  based on approximations which are not valid through the entire evolution of the  binary. In recent years numerical relativity has had impressive success in  simulating the final phases of the coalescence of binary black holes. While  numerical relativity is too computationally expensive to use directly in the  search, this progress has made it possible to perform realistic tests of the  LIGO searches. The results of such tests can be used to improve the efficiency  of searches.Conversely, noise in the LIGO and Virgo detectors can reduce the  efficiency. This must be addressed by characterizing the quality of the data  from the detectors, and removing from the analysis times that will be  detrimental to the search.In this thesis we utilize recent results from numerical  relativity to study both the degree to which analytic models match realistic  waveforms and the ability of LIGO searches to make detections. We also apply the  matched-filter search to the problem of removing times of excess noise from the  search.