$TITLE:
Exploration of in-vivo phase-contrast micro-computed tomography with a laser plasma-based x-ray source

$DEPARTMENT:
Physics

$KEYWORDS:
Phase contrast imaging, X-ray holography, Ultrafast lasers

$ABSTRACT:
X-ray micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) is used for   in-vivo  tumor imaging in small-animal models of human disease for the purpose  of assessing the effectiveness of experimental drugs and/or treatments.  We have been constructing, developing, as well as investigating the  imaging performance experimentally, of an  in-vivo  , in-line holography, x-ray phase-contrast, cone-beam, micro-CT system with an ultrafast laser plasma-based x-ray source (ULX).Projection  images of various PMMA step wedge, silicon step wedge, and nylon fiber  phantoms, obtained using ULX with Mo and Ta targets and a Be filter,  were acquired in the Fresnel diffraction regime. Absorption contrast,  phase contrast, and the edge enhancement index were estimated. Line  profiles obtained for images of nylon fibers were compared to  theoretical simulations. Projection images obtained using ULX exhibited  strong diffraction fringes. We found phase contrast to exceed absorption  contrast by a factor of three in step-wedge images.Absorption CT projection sets of phantoms were acquired at various distances, using ULX with Mo target and Be filter. An  ex-vivo  tomosynthesis projection set (27 projections over 26° trajectory) of a  mouse was acquired using ULX. A novel cone-beam CT alignment method  using small attenuating spheres to determine the system geometry was  implemented. Software was developed and applied for raw image  pre-processing. Reconstructed images were compared to images obtained  using a commercial micro-CT scanner. We established that our ULX  micro-CT system is capable of phase-contrast projection imaging and CT  projection set acquisition. However, laser and x-ray target chamber  problems limited the quantity and quality of the images we obtained.  Reconstructed images of the cylindrical phantom and  ex-vivo  mouse, acquired with ULX, are not yet superior to those acquired with a conventional micro-CT scanner.In conclusion, we demonstrated that a ULX source can be applied to   in-vivo  micro-CT imaging and phase-contrast imaging provided that sufficient  average power and temporal stability is achieved. Such a ULX source  would allow obtaining information on the real part of the x-ray  refracting index distribution in live small animals. Such information  cannot be obtained by using a conventional micro-CT scanner.Keywords:  in-vivo  micro-CT, x-ray phase-contrast imaging, in-line x-ray holography, ultrafast laser plasma-based x-ray source