$TITLE:
Bioenergetics and dynamics of ciliary responses and systems biology of phototaxis in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

$DEPARTMENT:
Physics

$KEYWORDS:
ATP, ciliary motility, electric field, frequncy response, red light, signaling pathway

$ABSTRACT:
The goal of this dissertation is to understand how a eukaryotic  cell makes decisions. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a  biciliated unicellular green alga, is used as our model organism. This organism  has the ability to track the light using its photoreceptor called rhodopsin,  which overlays the eyespot. The organism makes decisions to swim toward, away  from, perpendicular to or to ignore the light using its slender arm-like  structures called cilia. It can integrate several external inputs such as ion  concentration and light intensity, and then process this information to adjust  the steering of its cilia corresponding to its environment.    We investigated how red light (670 nm) influences cell behavior. Most  studies were done with a single cell held on a micropipette making it possible  to observe the cilia behavior over a long time. The cell is illuminated with  near-infrared light (peak at 870 nm) to avoid photoreceptor excitation. Ciliary  movement is monitored using a quadrant photodiode detector (Chapter 2).  Interpreted ciliary behavior parameters are the beating frequency (BF) and the  stroke velocity (SV). Pulse stimuli were used to stimulate the mutant strain  806 (agg1), a  negatively phototactic cell, whose beating frequency is in the same range as  wild type. The "step-up" red light from the dark increases the beating frequency  as an exponential function, y(t) = a*[1-exp(-t/b)] where y is a beating  frequency, a is an amplitude and b is a time constant. On the other hand, the  "step-down" red light drops the beating frequency transiently and recovers to  its normal beating frequency of about 50 Hz in about 10 s. The 40 s duration  pulse gave the maximum transient drop of the beating frequency. Using  multi-sinusoidal red-light stimuli, I compared the behavior of the double mutant  (cpc1-2) relative to the single mutant  806 (cpc1-2 was  backcrossed to strain 806 so it is a single mutant  with respect to 806). The mutant misses the part of  the central-pair complex containing the enolase enzyme, one of the ciliary  glycolytic enzymes that produces ATP in the cilia. Under a high  constant-intensity of red light, the BF fluctuation is less than 2%. In the  dark, BF of cpc1-2 is about 30 Hz which is lower  than 806 probably due to less ATP being available.  However, BF can be increased to the 806 level of 50  Hz by exposure to red light. A simple hypothesis is that red-light  photosynthesis of the chloroplast makes ATP more available in the cell. In any  case, sinusoidal red-light response of cpc1-2 shows  that part of the early signal processing is approximately linear. In this case,  cells respond to a decrease in light intensity by differentiating the red light  signal. Our hypothesis is that the cell creates this signal to avoid futile  usage of ATP. The transfer function describing this step is, G(s) =  a*s*exp(-τ*s) where τ = 0.40 sec. In addition to this linear part,  both strains have non-linear or approximately full-wave rectified signal  processing of another red light created signal with a simple delay in time  described by the transfer function, G(s) =  a*exp(-τstrain*s) where  τ806 = 1.18 sec and  τcpc1-2 = 0.37 sec. The longer delay time of  806 is likely due to the slow conversion of  3-phosphoglycerate (3PG) to adenosine triphosphate (ATP), in the glycolytic  pathway, which is absent in the mutant. We hypothesize that the slow synthesis  is due to the positive Gibbs free energy of two steps in the ciliary glycolytic  pathway between 3PG and production of ATP and pyruvate. Furthermore, the beating  frequency of red-light sinusoidal responses is stabilized by negative feedback.  However, in the frequency range from 10 to 100 Hz in both strains that  stabilizing negative feedback becomes positive and the BF jumps to a new  state.    In addition, I also studied how external ion concentration such as  Ca2+, H+, and  K+, and red light affect phototaxis of positively and  negatively-phototactic cells (1117 and  806 respectively). I have tracked a cell population  using the cell-tracking system for 10 s after stimulating them with green light  (Chapter 4). Increasing  [Ca2+]ext with a red light  background enhances the motion of cells in the same and the opposite direction  respectively according to cells' phototactic behavior under normal condition  (pCa4 and pH 6.8). Increasing the pH tends to induce cells to move away from the  light while increasing the  [K+]ext gave the opposite  results. Changing external ion concentration such as  H+ and K+ affects the  cell's membrane potential. Changing Ca2+  concentration affects both membrane potential and likely triggers internal  signaling proteins such as IP3 and cAMP. Therefore, we  hypothesize that cells may integrate these and potentially other signals to  decide its phototaxis.    Finally, I developed a technique that can be used to measure changes of  the electric field across the plasma membrane of the cell in response to  rhodopsin excitation. Rhodopsin excitation is thought to cause transmembrane ion  influxes resulting in changes in the electric field across the plasma membrane.  These electric field signals are then sensed in the cilia to enable phototactic  steering of the cell (Chapter 5).