$TITLE:
Alternative Institutional Arrangements and Government Performance: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations of Autonomy and Accountability in Public Education

$DEPARTMENT:
Public Administration

$KEYWORDS:
Decentralization, Accountability, Government performance, Public education

$ABSTRACT:
This thesis studies  the efficiency effects of government (de)centralization (i.e.,  decentralization or centralization) along with a number of conditions  important to the effects. This is an important consideration because  social science is overwhelmed by the complexity associated with studying  (de)centralization, while real-world experiences cast a doubt that the  reforms may not work uniformly everywhere and at every time. When, then,  do the reforms work better, and where?  In search of an answer to this  question, this thesis consists of three parts: (a) theoretical  considerations using a system-based approach, (b) an econometric  analysis of cross-country cases in public education, and (c) an  exploratory study which utilizes a qualitative method of structured,  focused comparison involving cases of Japanese public education.Part  I develops a model which illuminates how (de)centralization affects  overall allocative efficiency in a complex way. The failure to take  complexity into account, as in the past, could result in an under- or  overestimations of the efficiency effects of the reforms. An empirical  analysis in Part II finds that two policies--granting autonomy to school  agents and making the agents accountable--are associated with greater  school technical efficiency and thus higher academic performance by  students, although the contributions of these policies are not always  additive. The qualitative study in Part III demonstrates that employee  entrenchment and the reform orientation of prefectural educational  administrations in Japan, among other conditions, affect the decisions  of prefectures to adopt a performance-based reward system (PBRS) for  school agents.The contributions of this thesis include the following: Part I shows how a system-based approach can  systematically  address the complexity of (de)centralization--a task that has yet to  be undertaken. Part II contributes to the decentralization literature by  using parsimonious measures of autonomy and underscores the  significance of interdependent effects of autonomy and accountability.  Lastly, Part III contributes to organizational theories and the policy  transfer literature by developing theories about how and why local  governments in a unitary state make certain decisions concerning a PBRS.  Combining the three parts, this thesis helps policy-makers and analysts  to better understand the complex factors that are related to  (de)centralization.