$TITLE:
Three essays on voluntary HIV testing and the HIV epidemic

$DEPARTMENT:
Public Administration

$KEYWORDS:
HIV testing, Epidemic, Partial identification, Voluntary testing, Causal inference, Program evaluation

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation  examines voluntary HIV testing in three specific contexts. The first  chapter evaluates the effects of written informed consent regulations on  HIV testing rates using a difference-in-differences approach to analyze  a natural experiment that occurred when New York State weakened its HIV  testing written informed consent regulations. The study finds that  streamlining the consent process in New York increased HIV testing rates  about 1.7 percentage points, which is a large relative increase of  approximately 31%.The second chapter uses  methods from the econometric literature on partially identified models  to estimate HIV prevalence from biometric survey data in which some  fraction of respondents opt out of the HIV testing module and are not  tested for HIV. The method is applied to biometric survey data collected  in four African countries: Kenya, Ethiopia, Lesotho, and Zimbabwe. A  key finding is that the estimates of HIV prevalence that are standard in  the literature represent an optimistic interpretation of the data. The  biometric survey data are consistent with a range of levels of HIV  prevalence, and standard estimates typically are much closer to the  lower end of this range than they are to the higher end.The  third chapter reports reanalyzes data from a field experiment conducted  in Malawi (Thornton, 2008). The experiment was intended to evaluate the  effect of participation in voluntary counseling and testing (VCT) on  condom purchasing. The experiment employed a non-standard design.  Subjects were randomly assigned one of 27 differently valued VCT  participation incentives that were meant to induce self-selection into  treatment and control groups. The design makes it difficult to  understand what treatment effects are uncovered by the data. The  reanalysis uses statistical tools from the literature on treatment  effect heterogeneity to clarify what the incentives experiment reveals  about the causal effects of VCT. It also evaluates the strengths and  weaknesses of the incentive based design. One interesting result is that  VCT participation caused an increase in condom purchasing among the  initial people induced to participate in VCT. But expansions of the  program to cover more than about 65% of the population actually reduced  condom purchasing among the new program entrants.