$TITLE:
The Effect of Physical Activity on the Insulin Response to Frequent Meals

$DEPARTMENT:
Exercise Science

$KEYWORDS:
Appetite, Insulin, Insulin Secretion, Meal Frequency, Physical Activity

$ABSTRACT:
Long, uninterrupted bouts of sedentary behavior are thought to  negatively influence insulin sensitivity, and may impact metabolic function  regardless of adherence to general physical activity guidelines. The purpose of  this study was to determine the combined effect of physical activity (1 h  continuous exercise v. intermittent exercise throughout the day) and meal  consumption on glucose excursions, insulin secretion, and appetite markers in  obese individuals with prediabetes. Methods: Eleven healthy, obese subjects  (>30 kg/m2) with prediabetes underwent 3, 12 h study days including sedentary  behavior (SED), exercise (EX; 1h morning exercise, 60-65% VO2 max), and physical  activity (PA; 12 hourly, intensity-matched 5-minute bouts). Meals were provided  every 2 h. Blood samples were taken every 10 min for 12 h. Baseline and area  under the curve (AUC) for serum glucose, insulin, c-peptide, total PYY  concentrations, and subjective appetite ratings; as well as insulin pulsatility  were determined. Results: No significant differences in baseline glucose,  insulin or c-peptide concentrations across study days were observed (P>0.05).  Glucose AUC (12 h and 2 h) were significantly different across study days, with  AUC attenuated in the PA condition compared to the EX condition (P<0.05). The  12 h incremental insulin AUC was reduced by PA compared to SED (173,985±3556.8  v. 227,352±4581.2 pmol/L*min for 12 h, respectively; P<0.05). Similarly, a  significant main effect of condition in the 2 h insulin AUC was found, with the  PA condition being reduced compared to SED condition (P<0.05), but no  differences between the EX and SED conditions. A significant reduction in 2 h  c-peptide AUC was demonstrated with EX and PA compared to the SED condition  (P<0.05). Deconvolution analysis of insulin secretion revealed no significant  differences between experimental conditions. There were no significant  differences in total PYY between experimental conditions, though subjective  measures of hunger and satiety were reduced with continuous and intermittent  exercise. Conclusions: Short bouts of physical activity throughout the day  attenuate glucose excursions and improve insulin clearance compared to an  exercise day with 1 h of morning exercise. Further, both continuous and  intermittent exercise mechanisms that improve satiety in obese individuals are  not related to changes in concentrations of PYY.