$TITLE:
Exercise effects on intramyocellular lipid content in younger and older obese subjects and in older non-obese subjects

$DEPARTMENT:
Exercise Science

$KEYWORDS:
Exercise effects, Lipid content, Intramyocellular lipids, Obesity

$ABSTRACT:
Exercise Science. Purpose.  This study examined the effects of age on intramyocellular (IMCL) stores in response to an acute exercise bout, as well as the effects of obesity in older women. METHODS: Twenty-seven women participated in this study: 9 younger obese (18-35 yr; BMI>30 kg/m  2  ), 9 older obese (55-70 yr), and 9 older non-obese (BMI<25kg/m  2  ). After controlling for diet and assessing muscle strength, the IMCL content in the right gastrocnemius and the soleus muscles were quantified by localized proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( 1  H-MRS) pre and post a resistance exercise bout. Fasting blood samples were also drawn and analyzed for glucose and lipid concentrations. Results.  The older obese women had higher pre-exercise fasting soleus IMCL content compared to the younger obese women (1.46±0.17mmol vs. 0.91±0.16mmol; p<0.05); but there were no differences in baseline gastrocnemius IMCL content between the groups. Further, there were no baseline differences between the older obese and lean women. The IMCL content was not altered with the exercise session in any of the groups. Conclusion.  Although IMCL levels in young, non-obese men have been shown to decrease with similar exercise stimuli as the present study, the IMCL content in these obese and older women did not change, suggesting that obesity and age significantly affect the plasticity of the IMCL pools to resistance exercise.Science Education. Purpose.  This project aimed to identify sex knowledge differences between freshmen and senior undergraduates.   Methods.  The Acquisition of Sexual Information Test was taken anonymously online and covered the four areas of human sexuality.  Results.  The freshmen (n=52) and senior (n=40) groups were similar in gender, ethnicity, college attended within the university and kind of sex ed received in high school. Overall, the senior students scored significantly higher (p=0.01) on the test compared to the freshman. More specifically, the seniors scored significantly higher in the sections on birth control, sexual relations and reproduction  (p<0.05) and in  male biological aspects of sexuality  (p=0.05).  Conclusion.  These data suggest that the seniors may have learned more about sexuality during their time at the university, thus helping to bridge the assumed knowledge gap from high school.