$TITLE:
A More Global Court? Judicial Transnationalism and the U.S. Supreme Court

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
Globalization, Law, Legal Process, Supreme Court

$ABSTRACT:
For many decades, Supreme Court justices and legal scholars have  argued over the validity of different tools in constitutional interpretation,  including social science data, public opinion and, most recently, laws and  standards of decency from abroad. Although several of those currently on the  bench maintain that foreign laws have no place in American constitutional  adjudication, the larger universe in which their institution operates has become  increasingly transnational since the end of the Cold War. The term judicial  transnationalism has been coined to describe this phenomenon, characterized by  unprecedented levels of interaction and exchange between foreign courts and  legal activists. This project examines these changes, evaluating the extent to  which they have resulted in higher levels or new forms of foreign and  transnational participation and interest in Supreme Court cases. In doing so, it  tests three observations made about the effect of judicial globalization on the  Court. First, it has been suggested that because of the increasingly complex and  global nature of legal structures, the Court is more likely to hear cases that  involve some form of foreign or international law. Second, scholars have noted  that the Court is increasingly subject to foreign and international legal  arguments put forth by a range of participants in and observers of its judicial  process. Third, contemporary justices appear to be increasingly engaged in an  ongoing conversation about judicial globalization, having become more vocal in  discussing its implications in Court opinions as well as public forums. Although  these observations have been widely made by scholars of the Court, they lack  empirical support. By analyzing the litigant and amicus briefs filed in all  cases from the 1989-1990, 1999-2000, and 2009-2010 dockets, this project  attempts to provide this support and determine if there been an increase in the  presence of foreign law arguments made in briefs filed to the Supreme Court,  what kinds of actors are introducing transnational arguments to the Court, and  if contemporary justices are devoting more attention to transnationalism in  their opinions, public statements, and professional activities.