$TITLE:
Taxes, Welfare and Democratic Discourse: Mainstream Media Coverage and the Rise of the American New Right

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
Framing, Hegemony, New Right, News media, Public opinion, Public policy

$ABSTRACT:
Research demonstrates that news media can shape mass opinion on  specific public policy issues in politically consequential ways. However,  systematic and critical empirical analysis of the ideological diversity of such  news coverage is rare. Scholars have also illuminated how and why U.S. economic  and social welfare policy has shifted rightward in recent decades, but they have  failed to consider media's role in shaping public opinion to democratically  legitimate this major reorientation of political economy to favor business and  upper-income constituencies. I combine neo-Gramscian theorizations of hegemony,  popular common sense and articulation with social scientific research on  framing, priming and psychological ambivalence to examine mainstream news  coverage of two key policy debates during the neoliberal era: 1) the Economic  Recovery Tax Act of 1981, and 2) the Personal Responsibility and Work  Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996.Quantitative content analyses of network television and  mass-market print news indicates that: 1) coverage focused on a procedural,  strategic and tactical narrative that relied overwhelmingly on official sources  and included little policy substance. This discourse normalized an  elite-centered politics that resonates with and confirms strands of American  common sense that support popular civic disengagement, and 2) neoliberal-New  Right themes valorizing market imperatives and demonizing social provision  dominated alternative frames. Qualitative textual analyses of key artifacts of  political discourse shows how such hegemonic messages deployed a  conservative-populist rhetoric to effectively obscure corporate and upper-income  prerogatives by depicting these policy moves as commonsensical projects that  advanced ordinary people's material interests and cultural values. Potentially  counter-hegemonic interpretations that drew on culturally resonant fragments of  common sense to offer strong challenges to the center-right elite consensus were  propagated, but mainstream news virtually ignored these messages. As a result,  citizens lacked effective access to a diverse range of messages and to critical  information that might have generated more opposition to the right turn in  opinion polls. In an experiment, I show that exposure to strongly hegemonic news  treatments can cause even low- and middle-income people and those with  egalitarian tendencies to express support for neoliberal-New Right economic  policies, and that less strongly hegemonic coverage can prompt significantly  more opposition.