$TITLE:
Does Deliberation Make Better Citizens? Examining the Case of Community Conflict Mediation

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
Citizenship, Civic Education, Community Mediation, Deliberation, Deliberative Democracy, Mediation

$ABSTRACT:
In this dissertation, I explore the educative effects of  deliberation through interviews and observation at two community mediation  organizations in Toronto. Theorists have long claimed that participation in  deliberation can change the skills and dispositions of participants in ways that  make them better citizens. Despite the normative work such claims perform in  justifications for participatory and deliberative democracy, they remain  theoretically and empirically underscrutinized. I seek to address this by  developing empirically grounded insights about the educative potential that can  realistically be attributed to deliberative processes. I argue that educative  claims can best be examined when parsed into three categories of  efficacy, interests  and relationships. I identify empirical contexts  ripe for the study of deliberation's educative effects by sorting the  deliberative field according to 1) collective decision making, 2) issue scope,  and 3) participative intensity. One such context is community mediation, a  process of facilitated negotiation for addressing small scale citizen disputes  convened by staff and volunteers at Community Dispute Resolution organizations  (CDRs). I study this case empirically through in-depth interviewing and  observation at two CDRs in Toronto.I find limited evidence that participation in deliberation in  this context can strengthen the efficacy or clarify the interests of  participants. Furthermore, the efficacy and interest effects I do find are often  limited to the specific context of the mediated relationship. I find that  relationship effects are the most salient in participants' post-deliberation  narratives, but that they frequently characterize their renegotiated  relationships in terms of mistrust, indifference, and avoidance. This runs  contrary to the thrust of theorizing about the potential for deliberation to  strengthen civic bonds between citizens. Yet participants praise this avoidance  suggesting that it should be viewed, at least in some cases, as an appropriate  ideal. I conclude that a wholly dismissive view of educative claims is not borne  out by the evidence of modest educative effects reported by a minority of  participants. It does however, provide reasons to moderate educative claims  considerably and to reinterrogate standard conceptions of what constitutes  "better citizens".