$TITLE:
From Donorship to Ownership? Evolving Donor-Government Relationships in Rwanda

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
Development, Foreign Aid, Rwanda

$ABSTRACT:
Over the course of the last decade there has been an increasing  emphasis on recipient-country ownership, or the "effective exercise of a  government's authority over development policies and activities, including those  that rely...on external resources" (OECD 2007), within the international  development community. This new emphasis is not only rhetorical but has resulted  in a host of new aid programs promising increased ownership. Broadly speaking,  these aid programs are supposed to change the institutional relationships  between donors and recipient-country governments and allow aid beneficiaries to  have a say over the development policies that impact their daily lives. However,  despite their prevalence, we know relatively little about how such aid programs  affect donor-government relationships and the policy decision-making process in  aid-dependent states.In the following dissertation project, I analyze four "ownership"  aid programs in post-genocide Rwanda: the poverty reduction strategy program;  budget support; the aid coordination, harmonization, and alignment framework;  and the Rwandan Joint Governance Assessment. In each case study, I look for  evidence that the aid program has resulted in the outcomes predicted by their  proponents: increased government and citizen influence, and decreased donor  influence. Data largely come from fieldwork I conducted in Rwanda during 2009  and 2010.My analysis suggests that key Rwandan government officials use  the idea of ownership to seek influence over decision-making processes. However,  the aforementioned aid programs have not resulted in the outcomes predicted by  proponents of the ownership approach in two key ways. One, donors have not  retreated nor given control over development policy to recipient countries.  Rather they have sought alternative ways of influencing the policy process. Two,  what we see emerging in Rwanda is not broad national ownership. Instead, donors  work with an elite group of government policymakers. I call this type of aid  relationship "centralized collaboration," meaning that multilateral and  bilateral donors work with a small group of domestic actors to design and  implement socio-economic development strategies.I conclude by arguing that this outcome is largely the result of  three things: donor preferences, the amount of leverage the GoR is able to exert  over donors, and existing state-society relationships. These three factors  provide a framework for assessing and analyzing donor-government relationships  and ownership aid programs in other aid-dependent states.