$TITLE:
Treatment as a Common Good: Adopting HIV/AIDS Policy in Russia and South Africa, 1999-2008

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
common good, HIV/AIDS, policy transfer, Russia, social purpose, South Africa

$ABSTRACT:
The goal of this dissertation is to increase our understanding of  domestic policy responses to initiatives and expertise as provided by  international health organizations. Although following international  recommendations often improves domestic public health, in certain circumstances  resistance to adopting them persists. My core theoretical argument suggests that  a strong societal agreement about what constitutes the "common good" served by  state (e.g., "social purpose") informs how domestic policy-makers evaluate the  benefits of adopting international recommendations. This agreement also affects  how governments frame the provision of treatment, decide which subpopulations  should benefit from the consumption of public good, and choose their partners in  policy implementation. To demonstrate the impact of social purpose I examine  how, why and with what consequences Russia and South Africa adopted the external  best case practices, guidelines, and recommendations in regard to the HIV/AIDS  treatment. In doing so, I investigate how major international health,  developmental, and financial organizations formulated the global HIV/AIDS  policy, and devise a set of indicators operationalizing this policy. Then, I use  these indicators to design a structured, focused comparison of the domestic  HIV/AIDS policy responses and empirically demonstrate that governments in both  states created policy environments sanctioning a highly selective approach to  international policy guidelines and recommendations. Rather than responding the  epidemic as a pressing public health issue Russia's "Sovereign Democracy"  prompted the government to respond to HIV/AIDS as the issue of demographic  survival and criminal drug abuse. This choice subsequently eroded the human  rights component from the official policy, overcommitted the government  financially, and frustrated the cooperation with private sector and civil  society. The imperatives of "African Renaissance" reframed the HIV/AIDS epidemic  as a local developmental problem. As a result, the Cabinet supported substandard  biomedical treatments and indigenous healing practices, consistently resisted  the universal and free rollout of treatment in order to avoid the undesirable  governmental expenditures and redistributive strategies. In both countries,  these policy choices resulted in the adverse consequences for public health and  prompted a protracted contestation among various state and non-state actors  around the principles of the desired public health policies.