$TITLE:
Legitimacy in a post-national context: Efficiency and democracy in the European Union

$DEPARTMENT:
Political Science

$KEYWORDS:
European Union, Legitimacy, Efficiency, Inequality, Democracy

$ABSTRACT:
Most observers agree that the Maastricht Treaty of 1997 exposed the  disconnect between the European Union as an effective and efficient  international organization of economic interdependence and an  institution standing for the rights and interests of the people it  claims to represent. Yet, since 1997 the effectiveness of European  economic integration has been called into question by growing  socioeconomic inequality in some sectors of society. As a result, the  persistent neglect of the European peoples' democratic rights has  assumed center stage in the legitimacy debates. In light of this  dilemma, this study examines two problems associated with issues of  governance at supranational level. First, modern international  organizations are premised on a utilitarian model of instrumental  rationality which encourages the drive for a maximization of security  and/or economic integration. Historically, the utilitarian model has  worked against the models of governance based on human rights. Hence,  the logic imposes severe limits on successful resolution of the current  legitimacy crisis. Second, today's international system is characterized  by increased integration along functionally differentiated spheres  (economic, legal, social, cultural) and the absence of any effective  mediating powers in the political sphere. Conflicts arising within or  between functionally differentiated spheres are left to self-policing  mechanisms. Recent structural changes in international organization and  governance have consequently unraveled both (a) the old and comfortable  political contract between the state as protector and guarantor of human  rights and its citizens, and (b) the social contract in which the  public sphere of the state acts as a neutral arena for mediating the  interests of different economic classes. The resolution of the current  crisis of global governance requires a new political-social contract  between the governors and the governed. In this study I offer a model of  legitimacy that joins a commitment to principles of equality, democracy  and rights with increased integration and new forms of international  organization.