$TITLE:
Generalization programming and school-based consultation: The effects of a generalization training program on teachers' consultation-related skills

$DEPARTMENT:
Psychology

$KEYWORDS:
Generalization, School-based consultation, Teachers, Consultation-related

$ABSTRACT:
One of the highlighted benefits of school-based consultation is that it has the potential to be preventative. That is, school-based consultation has been conceptualized as an indirect form of service delivery wherein consultants (i.e., school psychologists) work with consultees (i.e., teachers) to effectively intervene with children experiencing academic or behavioral difficulties. This type of service delivery is preventative in that it promotes early intervention on an ongoing basis to a large number of teachers and students. In addition, training teachers in problem-solving skills may increase the likelihood that these skills will be used in an ongoing basis. Unfortunately, while there is evidence indicating the effectiveness of consultation, many of the preventative advantages of consultation have yet to be fully evaluated. The purpose of the present study was to first examine the extent to which teachers generalize consultation-related skills in the classroom. A second purpose was to examine the extent to which teachers generalize consultation-related skills in the classroom following a generalization prompt by the consultant. The final purpose was to examine the extent to which teachers generalize consultation-related skill in the classroom following exposure to a generalization training program provided by the consultant. A multiple baseline across subjects design was used to examine generalization of school-based consultation and the effects of a generalization prompt and a generalization training condition. In general, two of the three participants demonstrated increases in generalization behaviors following the generalization prompt and generalization training program. Specifically, consultee 1 gradually increased generalization behavior during each stage of the experiment; consultee 2 showed little increase in generalization behavior throughout the experiment; and finally, consultee 3 showed a small increase after consultation services were provided, a significant increase after the generalization prompt and another small increase after the generalization training program. Overall, the results suggest that providing a specific generalization prompt and participating in a generalization training program may increase the amount that teachers generalize intervention skills with non-target students.