$TITLE:
Language familiarity and the influence of reading on visual search strategies

$DEPARTMENT:
Psychology

$KEYWORDS:
Language familiarity, Reading behaviors, Visual search, Search patterns, Eye movements

$ABSTRACT:
Prior research indicates that subjects adopt a particular search pattern  during visual search tasks.  These search strategies are influenced by a  variety of factors including color, orientation, size, and distinctness  of stimuli.  This project attempts to assess the level of influence  language fluency has on visual search tasks.  Experiments 1, 2, and 3  assess whether visual search tasks are affected by prior learned reading  behaviors associated with particular languages.  For these experiments,  subjects were chosen based on fluency with Hebrew and English.  These  experiments used targets and distractors composed entirely of English,  Hebrew, or symbols in different blocks.  The experiments differed in the  layout of the stimuli ranging from grid format of single characters and  words, to text like formats using words.  Language fluency groups were  assessed on biases in search patterns using an eye tracker:  left-to-right saccades during a block of English stimuli and right-to  left saccades during a block of Hebrew stimuli.  Results indicate a  strong influence of prior learned reading behaviors on eye movements  during visual searches.  Subjects displayed differential eye movement  patterns based on the stimuli for all three experiments.   Subjects  fluent in Hebrew showed eye search patterns similar to patterns observed  while reading Hebrew text during the Hebrew block.  During the English  block, all subjects showed eye patterns similar to reading behaviors of  English text.  The fourth experiment determined differences in reaction  times in a variety of conditions manipulating the language of the target  word and the language of the distractor words.  Subjects for this  experiment were chosen based on their familiarity with the languages  (Spanish and English) of the stimulus words.  The results from this  experiment indicate a reaction time cost for subjects fluent in both  languages of the stimuli.  More attention is needed to distinguish  reaction time costs for bilinguals, but this finding is consistent with  past research.  This experiment failed to find a clear effect of  language fluency on search times for Spanish words, nor did we find  strong evidence of a linguistic pop-out effect.  Collectively, these  results provide valuable insight into the interaction of reading and  visual search behavior.