$TITLE:
The Transition to Kindergarten: Impact of Transition Preparation on Socio-Behavioral Outcomes for Children with and without Disabilities

$DEPARTMENT:
Psychology

$KEYWORDS:
developmental disability, early childhood, kindergarten, preschool, socio-behavioral outcomes, transition

$ABSTRACT:
The transition to kindergarten is regarded as a key early  childhood developmental milestone with important implications for later school  outcomes. This period presents many challenges to children with and without  disabilities, their families, and teachers. Despite its importance, there are  few empirical studies that examine kindergarten transition. In particular, no  prior research has investigated the impact of transition practices on  kindergarten outcomes for both populations of children with and without  disabilities. Therefore, the overarching goal of the current study was to  examine the relationship between kindergarten transition preparation and child  socio-behavioral outcomes in kindergarten among both typically developing  children (TD) and children with developmental delays and disabilities (DD). Data  collection involved parent/caregiver, preschool teacher, and kindergarten  teacher reports of child behavior and involvement in kindergarten transition  practices. Results showed that the involvement in transition preparation  activities of families and preschool teachers, but not kindergarten teachers,  was higher for children with DD than TD children. Additionally, preschool  teachers, but not kindergarten teachers or families, were found to have higher  involvement for children with poorer socio- behavioral competencies.  Hierarchical linear regression analyses demonstrated that the involvement of  preschool teachers in kindergarten transition preparation activities did not  predict unique variance in kindergarten outcomes for children with or without  DD. Instead, preschool child behavioral variables (i.e., adaptive and problem  behavior) significantly predicted kindergarten outcomes. Best practices in  kindergarten transition programming for children with and without disabilities  are discussed.