$TITLE:
The Voyager Problem: The effect of a science laboratory course focused on clinical teaching experiences

$DEPARTMENT:
Science Teaching

$KEYWORDS:
Preservice teachers, Self-efficacy, Science, Clinical, Laboratory course, Voyager Problem

$ABSTRACT:
A unique biological laboratory experience was created that fused  together biological content learned in a General Education introductory  biology course with content pedagogy and clinical experiences. The  intent of the course was to measure the participants self-efficacy  levels and biological content knowledge through the use of pre- and  post-test assessments and interviews. Seven freshmen pre-service  elementary students were enrolled in a biology laboratory section that  spent significant amounts of time learning biological content and  developing age-level appropriate lessons to teach that biological  content knowledge to elementary-aged children. The freshmen students  were paired with senior pre-service teachers. These teams then traveled  to participating K-6 elementary schools and performed a total of four  Kid's College events. A Kid's College event consisted of the entire  elementary school participating in three, thirty-minute science  experiences with seven-minute breaks in between. This Voyager/Kid's  College experience took place at four different elementary schools  throughout the semester. Despite a reduced amount of biological content  within the laboratory section, the Voyager Program freshmen performed as  well as other education majors within the same biology lecture course.  Additionally, the freshmen participant's self-efficacy and biological  content knowledge were assessed at the beginning and end of the  semester. The findings suggest that this method of pairing freshmen and  seniors together in clinical experiences significantly increased  self-efficacy and confidence in teaching biological topics and can serve  as a useful model to teacher preparation programs seeking to  incorporate clinical experiences into currently existing science  courses.