$TITLE:
Teaching Science to English Language Learners: Instructional Approaches of High School Teachers

$DEPARTMENT:
Science Teaching

$KEYWORDS:
English Language Learners, ELLs, Scientific literacy, High school, Science teachers, Teacher training

$ABSTRACT:
Students who are English Language Learners (ELLs) form the  fastest  growing segment of the American school population. Prompted by the call   for scientific literacy for all citizens, science educators too have   investigated the intersection of language and science instruction of  ELLs.  However these studies have typically been conducted with  elementary students.  Few studies have explored how high school science  teachers, particularly those  who have not received any special  training, approach science instruction of ELLs  and what supports them  in this endeavor.This was a qualitative case study conducted with five science  teachers  in one small urban high school that predominantly served ELLs.  The purpose of  this study was to examine instructional approaches used  by teachers to make  science accessible to ELLs and the factors that  supported or inhibited them in  developing their instructional  approaches. This goal encompassed the following  questions: (a) how  teachers viewed science instruction of ELLs, (b) how teachers  designed a  responsive program to teach science to ELLs, (c) what approaches   teachers used for curriculum development and instruction, (d) how  teachers  developed classroom learning communities to meet the needs of  ELLs.Seven instructional strategies and five perceived sources of support   emerged as findings of this research. In summary, teachers believed  that they  needed to make science more accessible for their ELL students  while promoting  their literacy skills. Teachers provided  individualized attention to students to  provide relevant support.  Teachers engaged their students in various types of  active learning  lessons in social contexts, where students worked on both  hands-on and  meaning-making activities and interacted with their peers and  teachers.  Teachers also created classroom communities and learning spaces where   students felt comfortable to seek and give help. Finally, teachers  identified  several sources of support that influenced their  instructional approaches  including, the structure of the school,  working on instructional teams,  collaborating and working with other  teachers especially English teachers and  including science teachers,  and participating in various professional  development activities.The findings indicated that the instructional approaches used by   teachers were largely supported by literacy education and science  education done  at elementary level. Findings also revealed that  teachers in this study  encouraged their ELLs to participate in  classroom conversations and involved  them in answering open-ended  questions. However, not all teachers in this study  had the same  repertoire of instructional strategies for their ELL students and  some  teachers demonstrated a better understanding of these approaches than   others. All teachers perceived that the structure of the school as well  as  collaborating and working with other teachers, especially English  teachers, as  their main source of support in designing instructional  approaches. This study  suggests that teacher educators and professional  development providers need to  develop courses and programs to help  high school teachers learn about how to  design instructional activities  that simultaneously promote both academic  science and English  literacy. Also, administrators need to create conditions at  their  schools that would allow teachers to interact, collaborate, and learn  from  each other.