$TITLE:
Genealogies of Resistance to Incarceration: Abolition Politics within Deinstitutionalization and Anti-Prison Activism in the U.S.

$DEPARTMENT:
Sociology

$KEYWORDS:
Abolition, Activism, Deinstitutionalization, Developmental disability, Mental health, Prison

$ABSTRACT:
"Genealogies of resistance to incarceration: Abolition politics  within de-institutionalization and anti- prison activism in the U.S." looks at  two main sites in which abolition of "total institutions" is enacted. The first  site is activism around penal and prison abolition. The second site is  deinstitutionalization- the move to close down institutions for people labeled  "mentally retarded" (or intellectual/developmental disabilities) and "mental  illness" (or psychiatric disabilities). My goals in this study are twofold and  interrelated. First, I investigate abolition or closure of institutions as a  radical form of activism and sketch the costs and benefits of engaging in  abolition as an activist tactic. I highlight the limits of reform efforts, but  also the way they are used strategically to improve the lives of those who are  incarcerated. My second aim is to demonstrate the interwoven relations between  multiple sites of incarceration and the resistance to them.I begin by sketching an alternative historiography of prisons and  institutions in an attempt to paint some of the perils of these systems that  were present from their inception. These landscapes of incarceration are also  mapped out in both historical and ideological ways. The phenomenon of  psychiatric and developmental disabilities centers closing and then turning into  prisons will be highlighted as a parable of the cyclical nature of social  control. I also connect prisons and mental institutions by demonstrating the  ways in which such institutions shifted from being rehabilitating to custodial;  were (and are) embedded in notions of danger; were created for economic gain;  and were influenced by increased medicalization, as well as racist and eugenic  impetuses that mark them to this day.One of the contributions of my research is in the utilization of Michel  Foucault's work not only theoretically, but also methodologically. Genealogies  interrogate truth claiming, notions of (scientific) progress, and the discovery  of one universal truth, and provide means to extrapolate buried histories of  ideas and actions that have been discarded and discredited. As part of this  genealogical excavation, I critically investigate instances of possibility, both  in deinstitutionalization as a tactic, a dream and its unfulfilled promises and  in relation to current prison abolition work and the vision of non-punitive  society. During and in the aftermath of the move out of institutions, many  critiques were laid out by policy makers, academics, and organizations that  cater to people with disabilities. In the popular imagination these staunch  criticisms have led to a backlash toward what can be characterized as "the  failure of deinstitutionalization." Part of this genealogy is devoted to  investigating the chasm between activists' perception of the process of  institutional closure and that of their critics.As part of such excavation, I also offer an analysis of the ways in  which disability, mental illness and prisoners have been constructed in the  social sciences (what Foucault characterizes as erudite knowledge), as well as  the ways in which these characterizations are resisted, enacted or performed by  prison abolition and de-institutionalization activists. I particularly highlight  the critiques of the social world offered by those engaging in  deinstitutionalization and prison abolition (about disability/mental  illness/mental retardation, concepts of home and community, dependence, crime  and punishment, social control, social justice etc.). Genealogy also encompasses  the excavation of subjugated knowledges, in the Foucauldian sense as both buried  histories -the story of the enactment of prisons and institutions told by the  activists who wish to abolish them; and disqualified knowledge- disability  studies, anti psychiatry scholarship and critical prison studies as forms of  knowledge that are deemed non-scientific and illegitimate.Lastly, this work maps the various ways one fights against total  institutions and target the instances in which abolition is seen as a useful  strategy. In sum, I trace the costs and benefits of utilizing abolition as a  strategy of resistance to incarceration, for the activists, for perceptions of  them and their work in the public discourse and for their prospective goals.  This research also attends to the various ways in which abolitionary practices  are combined with others (such as reform efforts) and the social or political  constraints that moved movements and activists from one strategy to the other in  the winding road towards a non-carceral society.