$TITLE:
Class and Gender in the Phillippines: Ethnographic Interviews with Female Employer-Female Domestic Dyads

$DEPARTMENT:
Sociology

$KEYWORDS:
domestic service, ethnographic interview, housework, intersectionality of class and gender, reflexibility, relationality

$ABSTRACT:
This study is an ethnographic analysis of the relationship  between female employers and female domestics in the Philippines focusing on how  it maintains and reproduces the intersecting class and gender relations of power  that brought the two women together. It also explores relationality - how the  privileging of one group of women is related to the exploitation of another.Data for analysis was based on interviews with 25 female  employer-female domestic dyads in a city in the Philippines in 1989. The  questions for the semi-structured interviews were focused on four major research  questions:1.) What kinds of female employer-female domestic relationship exist  between the women in this city?; 2.) What makes one female employer-female  domestic relationship similar to and different from another?; 3.) What is unique  about the Philippine case in terms this employer-employee relationship?; and 4.)  How is the intersectionality of class and gender relations articulated in the  female employer-female domestic relationship?The analysis reveals the existence of 4 types of female  employer-female domestic relationships. The dynamics of dependency, fictive  kinship, proprietarity, and deference are expressed in somewhat different ways.  But in all case these ways indicate an asymmetric power relationship. The  analysis suggests that these employers and domestics exhibit some level of  agency, empowerment and solidarity in their daily interactions. However these  are undermined by intersecting forces of class and gender relations in  Philippine society. In particular "compandrazgo", a system of patronage  well-entrenched in Philippines society since the Spanish era, inhibits  empowerment among domestics and female solidarity across class lines.