$TITLE:
"It's the Resources": Work, Governance, and the Institutionalization of an Emergency Food Network

$DEPARTMENT:


$KEYWORDS:
emergency, ethnography, food, hunger, organizations, pantry

$ABSTRACT:
Thousands of loosely connected organizations such as food  pantries and soup kitchens constitute the emergency food network. Organizations  in this network provide a critical source of food to millions of households each  year. This dissertation examines how organizations in one city-level emergency  food network acquire, manage, and use resources. It pays particular attention to  the relationships that develop between organizations and funding sources.Utilizing institutional ethnography, this dissertation explicates  the ways that everyday food provision in food pantries and soup kitchens is  connected to a broader picture of changing modes of governance in the public and  nonprofit sectors. The data were collected in Syracuse, New York, primarily  using in-depth interviewing. Thirty interviews were conducted with staff and  volunteers at food pantries and soup kitchens and fourteen interviews were  conducted with staff of agencies connected to food pantries and soup kitchens  through funding relationships.The emergency food network arose primarily to address gaps  created by structural inequality and the inadequate government social safety net  in the United States. Despite the enormous amount of labor that is dedicated to  operating organizations within the emergency food network, this dissertation  further supports other scholars' critiques of the network as inadequate. The  context in which the majority of the organizations in the network operate is a  religious context; many of the volunteers in the network are committed to  emergency food provision because of their religious beliefs. This religious  context has implications for ground-level services as well as the overall  institutionalization of the network.The government provides a significant amount of support for the  emergency food network, particularly in New York State. New York State's Hunger  Prevention and Nutrition Assistance Program provides a relatively stable source  of funding for Syracuse's food pantries and soup kitchens. This support has  helped to institutionalize the local network and bolster the relationship  between the regional food bank, which administers the state funding, and its  eligible member programs. Even with a relatively stable funding environment,  however, workers in food pantries and soup kitchens have been forced to develop  limiting mechanisms to help manage their finite resources. These limiting  mechanisms restrict the ability of the network to function as an adequate,  charitably-based safety net.This dissertation also suggests that activities in the local  network in which this study took place are becoming increasingly coordinated due  to funding relationships, particularly with the regional food bank. Most of the  approximately 70 food pantries and soup kitchens in Syracuse are "member  programs" of the regional food bank, and as such, they agree to participate in a  complex, but hierarchical relationship whereby the food bank guides,  coordinates, and monitors much of the activity happening on the ground. While  much of this coordination that has sought to improve local services, this  complex network is still failing to serve as an adequate response to hunger and  food insecurity.