$TITLE:
A Dis-Ability Perspective on the Stigmatization of Dissent: Critical Pedagogy, Critical Criminology, and Critical Animal Studies

$DEPARTMENT:
Social Sciences

$KEYWORDS:
Critical Animal Studies, Critical Criminology, Critical Pedagogy, Disability Studies, Eco-Terrorism, Transformative Justice

$ABSTRACT:
This intersectional and interdisciplinary social science  qualitative dissertation in six chapters is grounded in critical research and  theory for the purpose of engaged public service. This project is grounded in  three formal disciplines: education, criminology, and peace and conflict  studies. Within those three disciplines, this project interweaves newly emerging  fields of study together, including critical animal studies, eco-ability,  disability studies, environmental justice, transformative justice, green  criminology, anarchist studies, and critical criminology, This dissertation  adopts three qualitative methodologies; autoethnography, case study, and  critical pedagogy. My project uses the animal advocacy movement as its case  study. Using a critical pedagogy methodology, I explored why and how activists  respond to the stigmatization of being labeled as or associated with terrorists,  a process I refer to as "terrorization." Chapter One is an introduction to  global ecological conditions and post-September 11, 2001 US political repressive  conditions toward environmental and animal advocates. Chapter Two introduces the  three methodologies that employed for this research project: autoethnography,  case study, and critical pedagogy. Chapter Three argues that stigmatization is a  form of repression grounded from personal experiences and examined by means of  autoethnography disability studies, and critical criminology. Chapter Four,  introduces the case study of this dissertation: critical animal studies, which  is influenced by green criminology and anarchist studies. In Chapter Five,  through a critical pedagogical methodology, fourteen participants engage in a  dialogue on responding to political repression. Finally, in Chapter Six, two new  concepts are introduced to interweave all the fields of study and topics in the  dissertation together--eco-ability, a theory rooted in disability studies,  critical animal studies, and ecology, and transformative justice, a restorative,  liberatory, and empowering alternative justice system.