$TITLE:
Tuning Modernity: Musical Knowledge and Subjectivities in Colonial India, c. 1780s - c. 1900

$DEPARTMENT:
Social Sciences

$KEYWORDS:
Colonialism and Music, Indian Music History, Sourindramohan Tagore, South Asian History, William Jones

$ABSTRACT:
This dissertation studies two signal moments of intervention in  the musical field in colonial India: (i) the late-eighteenth century moment of  Orientalist scholarship, specifically, the appearance in 1792 of Sir William  Jones' "On the Musical Modes of the Hindoos," which fundamentally reconfigured  the way musics of the Indian subcontinent would be studied thereafter; and (ii)  the mid/late-nineteenth century moment that witnessed the first efforts among  the colonized to self-consciously produce themselves as modern musical subjects.  My enquiry into these two fertile passages in India's music history is an  attempt to disentangle the set of musico-historical processes that enliven a  larger question: what is modern--colonial modern, to be precise--about a music  and musical culture that claims a continuous tradition of cultivation over  thousands of years? In approaching this question, this dissertation not only  addresses the epistemological aspect of musical modernity in the Indian colony,  it also looks at two new forms of musical subjectivity inaugurated therein over  the course of colonialism's unfolding--one short-lived and one enduring. The  former, the Anglo-Indian musical subject, was enlivened in and through the sites  of British leisure in late-eighteenth century India--a time when `nautch' had  already emerged as the colonizers' favored form of entertainment. It ultimately  perished once the contingencies of colonial rule changed, and avenues of  European recreation became more easily available and accessible over the  nineteenth century. The other form of musical subjectivity that this  dissertation enquires into is that of the nineteenth century Bengali Bhadralok.  In tracing the genesis of this subject, I look at three pivotal figures:  Dwarkanath Tagore, Rammohan Roy, and Sourindramohan Tagore. I show that while  early stirrings of musical modernity can be evidenced in the first two, as a  systemic process it congealed only during the era of Sourindramohan in the last  third on the nineteenth century.