$TITLE:
Organizational relations and managerial behaviors of cultural nonprofit organizations in Korea: Autonomy, creativity, legitimacy and managerial orientations

$DEPARTMENT:
Social Sciences

$KEYWORDS:
Nonprofit organizations, Korea, Autonomy, Creativity, Legitimacy, Managerial orientations

$ABSTRACT:
The cultural nonprofit organizations in Korea are increasingly playing important roles in the cultural area in Korea. The critical values that these organizations can provide to the society are considered as the spirit of autonomy and creativity. This study examines the organizational issues embedded in the public-nonprofit relation in Korea. In addition, the unique managerial behaviors of cultural nonprofit organizations are examined in terms of artistic creativity, financial innovation and program specification style.The analysis framework in this study is based on an integrated perspective combining the resource dependence perspective, the ecological perspective and the institutional perspective of organization theory. A survey to 487 cultural nonprofit organizations registered in the Ministry of Culture and Tourism in Korea collected the data for hypothesis tests.Multiple regression analyses were conducted to examine the impacts of external funding on organizational autonomy focusing on three sub variables: goal setting, funding allocation and program choice. Multiple regression analyses also examined the impacts of external funding on organizational creativity focusing on three sub variables: program adaptation, original program development, and new program initiative. In addition, the impacts of external funding on government's legitimizing effect were analyzed. The impact analyses were conducted both with controlling institutional factors and without controlling institutional factors.Factor analysis drew out empirical components of artistic orientation attributes in the programming of cultural nonprofit organizations: innovativeness and provocativeness. Multiple regression analyses examined the impacts of external funding as well as organizational actors' roles on the artistic orientation attributes. Binomial probit regression models examined the impacts of external funding and organizational actors roles on innovation probability in the financial management of cultural nonprofit organizations. Binomial probit regression models estimated each impact of external funding and organizational actors' roles on each program specification style of the programming of cultural nonprofit organizations.This study found that public funding is likely to hurt the autonomy of the cultural nonprofit organizations, however, public funding level does not have significant relationships with the perceptions regarding organizational creativity of cultural nonprofit organizations in Korea. Private funding does not have significant impacts on both organizational autonomy and organizational creativity.