$TITLE:
Lesson Study: Developing a Knowledge Base for Elementary Writing Instruction

$DEPARTMENT:
Teaching and Leadership

$KEYWORDS:
Elementary, Lesson Study, Writing Instruction

$ABSTRACT:
Concern about students' writing skills has led to recommendations  that elementary teachers receive more professional development in how to teach  writing (National Commission on Writing, 2006). However, there is currently  little evidence about the knowledge teachers need to teach writing well, and it  is therefore difficult for teacher educators to design effective professional  development experiences. What is needed is a better understanding of the  knowledge base that informs teaching writing to elementary children.One possible means of gathering evidence about this knowledge  base is through a collaborative teacher research process known as lesson study  (Hiebert, Gallimore, & Stigler, 2002; Lewis, Perry, & Murata, 2006).  Lesson study engages teachers in planning, evaluating, and improving lessons, so  the process generates knowledge teachers find useful for their practice and may  provide a mechanism for identifying some of the knowledge needed to teach  writing. The goal of this study was to explore that possibility by describing  the knowledge about writing instruction that elementary teachers generated  through the lesson study process.This qualitative case study drew on complexity theory (Davis  & Sumara, 2006), to conceptualize lesson study as a knowledge producing  process and the lesson study groups who participated as knowledge producing  systems. It addressed two main questions: (1) How did the lesson study systems  enable and constrain the knowledge about writing instruction that emerged  through them? and (2) What was the nature and content of the knowledge about  writing instruction that emerged through the lesson study systems? Four lesson  study groups, two in each of two elementary schools, participated. Data was  collected through videotaping the lesson study sessions, collecting the  documents the groups created during the lesson study process, and interviewing  the participants after the lesson study cycle ended.The findings indicated that instances of over constraint, under  constraint, and enabling constraint occurred in each lesson study group and that  the groups produced knowledge that varied in content and nature. In general,  instances of enabling constraint produced knowledge that fit the criteria for  professional knowledge outlined by lesson study proponents (Hiebert, Gallimore,  & Stigler, 2002). Instances of over constraint and under constraint produced  knowledge that did not fit the professional knowledge criteria. This knowledge  may therefore be less useful for teachers outside the lesson study groups than  for the teachers who generated it. The findings suggests that lesson study can,  but does not always, produce knowledge suitable for the professional knowledge  base for teaching writing. The implication is that, if lesson study groups are  to generate knowledge for the knowledge base, they must be organized is such a  way that they prompt enabling constraint within themselves.