$TITLE:
Relationship of self-directed learning readiness and job characteristics to job satisfaction for professional nurses

$DEPARTMENT:
Teaching and Leadership

$KEYWORDS:
Self-Directed Learning Readiness Scale, Job Diagnostic Survey

$ABSTRACT:
There is a need for more knowledge regarding predictors of job satisfaction for professional nurses, whose careers are being influenced by complex social, technological, political, and economic changes. In this study, the collective and separate contributions of self-directed learning readiness and job characteristics to job satisfaction for professional nurses are examined.One hundred eighty nurses were randomly selected to participate in the study. The Self-Directed Learning Readiness Scale (SDLRS) was used to measure the nurses' level of self-directed learning. The Job Diagnostic Survey (JDS) was used to measure their perceptions of job characteristics, motivating potential of a job, and job satisfaction.Data indicated that professional nurses perceived themselves to be high in self-directed learning readiness and perceived their jobs to be high in the job characteristics of task identity, task significance, skill variety, autonomy, and feedback from the job. They also perceived their jobs to possess high motivating potential and were most satisfied when practicing in settings in which they had autonomy. Analysis indicated that nurses pursuing a degree scored statistically higher on the SDLRS (M = 244) than those who were not pursuing a degree (M = 234), t(113) = 2.30, p $<$.05. Practice model emerged as a possible influencing variable of motivating potential of a job, F(6,104) = 3.88, p $<$.01 and basic nursing education emerged as a possible influencing variable of job satisfaction, F(3,11) = 2.91, p $<$.05. The interaction of self-directed learning readiness and job characteristics (Interact), and motivating potential of the job (MPS) predicted 29% of the variance in job satisfaction for professional nurses, R$\sp2$ = 0.29.Recommendations for future research include studies that continue to test the relationship among self-directed learning readiness, job characteristics, and job satisfaction. Continued research is also needed to test the relationship between basic nursing education program and job satisfaction and to test the relationship between practice model and motivating potential of a job. It is further recommended that additional investigations relative to the social context of self-directed learning readiness and job satisfaction be vigorously pursued.