$TITLE:
Left behind: The effects of NCLB on urban educators of students with disabilities

$DEPARTMENT:
Teaching and Leadership

$KEYWORDS:
NCLB, No Child Left Behind, Accountability, Urban education, Policy, School reform, Disabilities, Students w/ disabilities

$ABSTRACT:
This qualitative  study investigated the effects of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act on  the education of students with disabilities in a large city school  system, from the perspectives of general educators, special educators,  and school administrators in that system. NCLB requires states to hold  schools accountable for closing gaps in performance between students  with disabilities and their peers. School systems that fail to meet  targets for acceptable improvement several years in a row are required  to adopt "comprehensive school reforms" and face sanctions if their  students' performance continues to lag.Sustainable  large-scale reform is affected by those who carry it out. Past research  on standards-based accountability strategies documents the complexities  urban districts face in carrying out reforms like NCLB. Because little  is known about NCLB's effects on the academic progress of students with  disabilities (Center on Education Policy, 2009), or about educators'  perceptions regarding current school reform for this subgroup (Vannest  et al., 2009), addressing this gap is important. The study reported here  acknowledges the "voices" of educators who are directly responsible for  the education of students with disabilities in one urban district in  upstate New York. McCracken's (1989) four-part model of inquiry was used  to conduct structured interviews with educators (n=26) to gain insight  into their perspectives about NCLB reform in their district.This  study revealed how convoluted NCLB reform agendas can be, and how  critical the roles of educators can be, in successfully implementing  NCLB's requirements (or perceived NCLB requirements). Although most  participants believed that educators must be held accountable for the  education of students with disabilities, they felt NCLB's current  consequence-driven accountability initiatives hindered, rather than  supported, best-practice teaching. Those who felt they had no voice in  how NCLB mandates were implemented shared feelings of frustration,  stress and angst associated with their instructional and/or  collaborative roles. Finally, this study confirmed past research, which  found that top-down reforms are only as successful as the individuals at  the ground-level make them (Fullan & Hargreaves, 1996). It also  provides insight into why one urban district made limited progress in  reducing achievement gaps for students with disabilities.